                                                               607




[L.A. No. 32054. Dec. 23, 1985.]

Estate of MARY SANDERS, Deceased.
SARA SANDERS et al., Petitioners and Appellants, v.
FRANK C. SUTTON, as Executor, etc., Objector and Respondent.
608
609
610




Counsel

Richard J. Scuba for Petitioners and Appellants.

Thomas A. Henry, Jr., for Objector and Respondent.



Opinion

BROUSSARD, J.                      Appellants,
                                        SandersSara
                                                 and her sons Darren and Dav-
id, appeal from an order of the Superior Court of San Diego County denying
their motion to set aside the court’s previous orders admitting the will of
Mary Sanders to probate and ordering final distribution. Appellants moved
to set aside the probate orders after they learned that respondent Frank
Sutton, the executor, would inherit the bulk of the estate. Appellants allege
that by concealment and misrepresentation Sutton prevented them from con-
testing the will within the statutory period. We conclude that appellants’
allegations are sufficient to establish extrinsic fraud and we reverse the or-
der.

                                              I

  The facts are undisputed.1 In 1957, Mary Sanders suffered a “ruptured
intracranial aneurysm” and was placed in an institution where she remained
until her death on January 17, 1983. Her son, Gary Sanders, served as her
conservator until his death in 1978. Respondent Sutton, Mrs. Sanders’ neph-
ew, was then appointed her conservator. At the time of respondent’s ap-
pointment, Mrs. Sanders had a holographic will which left her entire estate
to her son Gary. Sara Sanders,2 Gary’s widow, knew that under this will

   1The facts are derived primarily from the affidavit of Sara Sanders submitted in the trial
court. Respondent did not submit an affidavit of his own and has not denied appellants’
factual assertions. He instead takes the position that even if appellants’ declarations are
accepted as true, they do not support a claim of extrinsic fraud. We are thus required for
purposes of this appeal to accept the facts as uncontroverted.
  2Hereinafter referred to as “Sara” in order to avoid confusion with the decedent, Mrs.
Mary Sanders.
                                                                                        611



her sons would receive the entire estate by right of representation.3 From
the time of Sutton’s appointment as conservator, he appeared to be very
attentive to the boys’ interests. He attempted, for example, to secure money
to finance their educational and other expenses. Sara trusted Sutton com-
pletely.

  In 1980, Sutton took his aunt to a meeting with his attorney, where Mrs.
Sanders executed a will leaving him her one-third interest in a parcel of
land in downtown San Diego.4 This parcel is referred to by the parties as
the “Market Street property.” The probate referee appraised the one-third
interest at $475,000 in 1983. The total value of Mrs. Sanders’ estate at that
time was fixed at $554,870. The will also named Sutton executor and trustee
of a testamentary trust for Darren and David.5

   After a memorial service for Mrs. Sanders on January 23, 1983, Sara
initiated a conversation with Sutton in which they discussed Mrs. Sanders’
will, her Market Street property, and the estate in general. Sara asked Sut-
ton about the Market Street property, how the tax obligations were being
paid and whether she or the boys would be responsible for any taxes or
other expenses. Sutton did not respond to her specific inquiries, but repeat-
edly assured her that he would take care of everything and that she had no
responsibilities in the matter. He also told her that he would work with the
lawyer to guarantee that everything was handled properly and that she had
no reason to call or contact his attorney, whom he had retained for the
probate proceedings. Sutton told her not to worry or concern herself with
the estate, he would see to it that everything was in order. He also told her
that Mrs. Sanders’ will had been put into “legal form” in order to avoid
any problems in probate. He did not tell her that in putting the will into
“legal form” the dispositive provisions had been revised so that he, rather
than the boys, would inherit most of the estate. He again emphasized that
if he or the attorney needed anything from her, they would contact her. On
her drive home from the memorial service, Sara remembered thinking how
knowledgeable Sutton was and how fortunate she and the boys were to have

  3Although Sara was not a beneficiary under the holographic will, respondent does not
object to her participation in this appeal along with her sons.
  4By affidavit submitted in the trial court, Sutton’s attorney declared that he prepared two
wills for Mrs. Sanders, the first on December 11, 1978, and the second on November 21,
1980. The second will revoked the first. He claims that to the best of his knowledge “the
decedent executed each will with an understanding of the size and extent of her estate and
the natural objects of her bounty and was under no fraud, menace or distress at the time of
such executions.” The attorney’s affidavit does not deny Sara’s assertion that in 1978 Mrs.
Sanders had a holographic will which left her entire estate to Darren and David. Nor does
his affidavit deny any of appellants’ assertions regarding Sutton’s conduct.
   5Darren and David were to receive 70 percent of the residue of the estate to be divided
equally between them and held in trust by Sutton as trustee until both boys had reached the
age of 30 and under various other terms and conditions.
612



him taking care of all the details. She was thankful that he was saving them
from going through the same “trials and tribulations” they experienced after
her husband’s death five years before.

   On February 9, 1983, Sutton filed a petition to probate the will and for
letters testamentary. A formal notice of the death and of a hearing on Sut-
ton’s petition was mailed to and received by appellants. Upon receipt of the
notice, Sara called Sutton and asked if it was necessary for her to do any-
thing at that time. He again assured her that everything was fine—he and
the lawyer were handling the matter, and the boys’ interests were well
represented. Appellants did not attend the hearing. On March 10, 1983, the
court issued an order admitting the will to probate and appointing Sutton
executor. The adoption of this order commenced the 120-day statutory pe-
riod for a contest of the will. (See Prob. Code, § 380.)

  In April 1983, appellants began receiving statements regarding the estate
from the Bank of California. Sara was surprised to see that the Market Street
property was not listed. She wrote a letter to Sutton thanking him for his
“kindness” and requesting that he send any information he had on the Mar-
ket Street property. She asked why the property did not appear on the fi-
nancial statements received from the bank. She also specifically asked
whether the property had been sold and, if not, what effect the Gas Lamp
Quarter redevelopment project in downtown San Diego would have on the
property.6 Sutton did not reply to the letter.

  In July 1983, Sara again attempted to contact Sutton, this time by tele-
phone. The call was not returned. In September 1983, she tried calling
Sutton both at his office and at his home. He was never present at either
location when she called and never responded to her messages to call her.
Sara and her son Darren attempted to contact Sutton on three subsequent
occasions without success. Their calls were not returned. Sara still trusted
Sutton at this point and was concerned that he might be insulted by her
repeated requests for information on the Market Street property.

  Sutton filed a final account and petition for distribution on January 11,
1984. A hearing on the petition was scheduled for February 1, 1984. Sara
received notice of the hearing on January 24, 1984. She did not recognize
the names of several of the intended beneficiaries. The notice also indicated
that all taxes and fees were due and payable as of March 1, 1984. Sara still
had not heard from Sutton and became concerned about the obligations the

   6In his affidavit submitted to the trial court, Sutton’s attorney noted that the creation of
the Gas Lamp Redevelopment District had “undoubtedly increased the value of the interest
[in the Market Street property].”
                                                                          613



probate proceeding might place on her and the children. She still had con-
fidence in Sutton, however, and did not want to hurt his feelings by ques-
tioning the lawyer before discussing the matter directly with him. She called
Sutton the day after receiving the notice, apparently at his office. The re-
ceptionist hung up on her.
   Sara finally succeeded in contacting Sutton on January 26, 1984. He told
her there was no need for her to attend the hearing. He assured her there
would be “no problems.” Although she asked him repeatedly about the
Market Street property, he was evasive in his answers. After the fourth
inquiry, Sutton admitted that he had had Mrs. Sanders change her will to
leave the property to him. He told her there was nothing she could do about
it now. Sara immediately contacted an attorney.
  Counsel for appellants appeared at the February 1 hearing to orally con-
test the petition. Appellants argued that they had learned only four days
before the hearing that the will being probated was the one drafted by Sut-
ton’s attorney in 1980, and that the bulk of the estate would go to him.
They argued that Sutton’s misrepresentations and concealment had prevent-
ed a timely contest of the will and constituted extrinsic fraud. The court
rejected appellants’ contest and entered a decree of final distribution award-
ing Sutton the interest in real property and net rentals, worth a total of
$496,780. Darren and David each received $11,410, to be held in trust by
Sutton as trustee until each boy reached the age of 30. Sara received $4,890.
  On February 14, 1984, appellants moved to set aside the order admitting
the will to probate and the order of final distribution. Appellants again
claimed such orders had been obtained by extrinsic fraud. The court denied
appellants’ motion after a hearing held on March 7, 1984. A formal order
was adopted on March 29, 1984, which included findings that appellants
had not shown extrinsic fraud and that no other reason supported setting
aside the orders.
  On appeal, appellants contend that respondent maintained a confidential
and fiduciary relationship with them which placed upon him a duty to dis-
close all material facts concerning the estate. They argue respondent
breached his duty by concealing and misrepresenting the facts, and that such
breach is fraudulent as a matter of law. Appellants also claim that respon-
dent’s conduct constitutes extrinsic fraud since by his silence and deception
he kept them from discovering the true nature of the will offered for probate
and thereby prevented a timely contest.
                                      II
  The probate of a will is conclusive if not contested within 120 days after
the will is admitted to probate. (Prob. Code, § 380.)           Even in the
614



absence of a timely contest, however, a court may exercise its equitable
jurisdiction to set aside orders and decrees of probate proceedings in cases
of fraud or mistake. (Estate of Charters (1956) 46 Cal.2d 227, 234 [293
P.2d 778]; Caldwell v. Taylor (1933) 218 Cal. 471, 475 [23 P.2d 758];
Bacon v. Bacon (1907) 150 Cal. 477, 481 [89 P. 317]; Baker v. O’Riordan
(1884) 65 Cal. 368, 370 [4 P. 232].)            It is well settled, however, that
 “only upon proof of extrinsic and collateral fraud can plaintiff seek and
secure equitable relief from the judgment. A showing of fraud practiced in
the trial of the original action will not suffice.” (Caldwell, supra, 218 Cal.
at p. 476.) The courts have required a showing of extrinsic fraud in order
to accommodate both the policy in favor of resolving issues in a final judg-
ment and the policy in favor of a fair adversary proceeding in which each
party is provided an opportunity to fully present its case. (Ibid.; Estate of
Charters, supra, 46 Cal.2d at pp. 234-235.)

   The seminal definition of extrinsic fraud is found in United States v.
Throckmorton (1878) 98 U.S. 61, 65-66 [25 L.Ed. 93, 95]: “Where the
unsuccessful party has been prevented from exhibiting fully his case, by
fraud or deception practised on him by his opponent, as by keeping him
away from court, a false promise of a compromise; or where the defendant
never had knowledge of the suit, being kept in ignorance by the acts of the
plaintiff; or where an attorney fraudulently or without authority assumes to
represent a party and connives at his defeat; or where the attorney regularly
employed corruptly sells out his client’s interest to the other side, these,
and similar cases which show that there has never been a real contest in the
trial or hearing of the case, are reasons for which a new suit may be sus-
tained to set aside and annul the former judgment or decree, and open the
case for a new and fair hearing. [Citations.] [1] In all these cases, and many
others which have been examined, relief has been granted, on the ground
that, by some fraud practised directly upon the party seeking relief against
the judgment or decree, that party has been prevented from presenting all
of his case to the court.”

  We recently observed that “[e]xtrinsic fraud is a broad concept that
‘tend[s] to encompass almost any set of extrinsic circumstances which de-
prive a party of a fair adversary hearing.’” (In re Marriage of Modnick
(1983) 33 Cal.3d 897, 905 [191 Cal.Rptr. 629, 663 P.2d 187], quoting from
In re Marriage of Park (1980) 27 Cal.3d 337, 342 [165 Cal.Rptr. 792, 612
P.2d 882].) The clearest examples of extrinsic fraud are cases in which the
aggrieved party is kept in ignorance of the proceeding or is in some other
way induced not to appear. (5 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Attack
on Judgment in Trial Court, § 184, pp. 3752-3753.) In both situations the
party is “fraudulently prevented from presenting his claim or defense.” (In
                                                                                          615



re Marriage of Modnick, supra, 33 Cal.3d at p. 905; see also 5 Witkin,
Cal. Procedure, supra, § 184, p. 3753.)

   The courts are particularly likely to grant relief from a judgment where
there has been a violation of a special or fiduciary relationship.
         The commentators have observed that breach of a fiduciary duty
may warrant setting aside the judgment even though the same conduct in a
nonfiduciary relationship would not be considered extrinsic fraud.7 (See
Freeman, Judgments, supra, § 1235, pp. 2575-2576; Moore, Moore’s Fed-
eral Practice (2d ed. 1948) [1] 60.37.[1], p. 614; Comment, Seeking More
Equitable Relief From Fraudulent Judgments: Abolishing the Extrinsic-In-
trinsic Distinction (1981) 12 Pacific L.J. 1013, citing above at p. 1021, fns.
65-66.)

   Appellants maintain that Sutton’s relationship with them was one of both
confidant and fiduciary.8         It is well settled that “[a] confidential rela-
tionship exists when  one  party gains the confidence of the other and purports
to act or advise with the other’s interests in mind; it may exist although
there is no fiduciary relationship; it is particularly likely to exist when there
is a family relationship or one of friendship.” (Kudokas v. Balkus (1972)
26 Cal.App.3d 744, 750 [103 Cal.Rptr. 318]; see also Vai v. Bank of Amer-
ica (1961) 56 Cal.2d 329, 337-338 [15 Cal.Rptr, 71, 364 P.2d 247].) It has
been more succinctly said that “[a] confidential relationship exists when
trust and confidence are reposed by one person in the integrity and fidelity
of another.” (Nicholson v. Rose (1980) 106 Cal.App.3d 457, 462 [165
Cal.Rptr. 156].) It is not necessary “that there be an extended period of
business or accommodation transactions or dealings between persons in or-
der for a confidential relationship to be established between them.” (Pryor
v. Bistline (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 437, 446 [30 Cal.Rptr. 376].)

         Sara’s uncontroverted affidavit reveals that from the time Sutton
was appointed to replace her husband as conservator, she relied on him to
protect the boys’ interests. Since Sutton was a member of the family and

   7“The failure to perform the duty to speak or make disclosures which rests upon one
because of a trust or confidential relationship is obviously a fraud for which equity may
afford relief from a judgment thereby obtained, even though the breach of duty occurs during
a judicial proceeding and involves false testimony and this is true whether such fraud be
regarded as extrinsic or as an exception to the extrinsic fraud rule.17'1'” (Freeman, Judgments
(5th ed. 1925) § 1235, p. 2576.)
   8Without argument, respondent simply declares that “[a]s conservator of the Estate of
Mary Sanders, the Respondent was in no confidential or fiduciary relationship with [Appel-
lants].” Respondent ignores the obligations arising from the relationship which developed
between him and appellants both before and after Mrs. Sanders’ death, and the fiduciary
duties arising from his position as executor. He does not explain how his position as con-
servator precluded a confidential and fiduciary relationship with appellants.
616



purported to act on the boys’ behalf, her reliance was reasonable. Sutton
must also have been aware of Sara’s trust and confidence in his represen-
tation given her regular inquiries regarding the Market Street property and
the boys’ obligations and responsibilities under the will. In view of Mrs.
Sanders’ prior holographic will leaving her entire estate to the boys, Sutton
could not have escaped notice of the significance of this trust. These facts
clearly show the existence of a confidential relationship.

  Sutton’s confidential relationship with appellants required that he not mis-
lead them as to the will he had filed for probate.             “ ‘Where there
exists a relationship of trust and confidence it is the duty of one in whom
the confidence is reposed to make full disclosure of all material facts within
his knowledge relating to the transaction in question and any concealment
of material facts is a fraud.’” (Estate of Shay (1925) 196 Cal. 355, 365
[237 P. 1079]; Martin v. Martin (1952) 110 Cal.App.2d 228, 233 [242 P.2d
688]; Main v. Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith, Inc. (1977) 67
Cal.App.3d 19, 32 [136 Cal.Rptr. 378].) “ ‘Where there is [such] a duty to
disclose, the disclosure must be full and complete, and any material con-
cealment or misrepresentation will amount to fraud sufficient to entitle the
party injured thereby to an action.’” (Stafford v. Shultz (1954) 42 Cal.2d
767, 777 [270 P.2d 1]; Main v. Merrill Lynch, supra.)

   In addition to the obligations arising from the confidential relationship,
Sutton bore a fiduciary duty to appellants by virtue of his position as exec-
utor of Mrs. Sanders’ estate.           An executor “ ‘is an officer of the court
and occupies a fiduciary relation toward all parties having an interest in the
estate.’” (Larrabee v. Tracy (1943) 21 Cal.2d 645, 650 [134 P.2d 265],
quoting from Estate of Conkey (1939) 35 Cal.App.2d 581, 585 [96 P.2d
383].) “‘Executors occupy trust relations toward the legatees, and are
bound to the utmost good faith in their transactions with the beneficiary.
. . .’” (Larrabee v. Tracy, supra, 21 Cal. 2d at p. 651, quoting from Bacon
v. Bacon, supra, 150 Cal. at p. 489.) An executor also bears a “duty to
disclose all the facts . . . and to refrain from taking an unfair advantage of
[the legatees].” (Blair v. Mahon (1951) 104 Cal.App.2d 44, 49 [230 P.2d
832].)

         Applying these principles here, it is evident that respondent violated
his confidential and fiduciary relationship with appellants through a consis-
tent course of concealment and misrepresentation. Sutton never disclosed to
appellants that he had arranged for the execution of a new will substituting
himself for the boys as the major beneficiary of the Sanders estate. He now
asserts that he would have violated his duties as conservator had he informed
appellants of the new will without Mrs. Sanders’ consent. However, even
after Mrs. Sanders’ death, a time when he owed appellants a duty to disclose
                                                                          617



all material facts, he continued to conceal the fact that the new will sub-
stantially affected appellants’ interests in the estate.

   Sutton not only failed to reveal the nature of the changes made in Mrs.
Sanders’ will, his representations appear calculated to leave the impression
that appellants’ interests had not been affected by the changes. Sutton told
Sara that Mrs. Sanders’ previous will had been put into “legal form” simply
to avoid problems in probate. He did not mention that the revision served
the added purpose of insuring that he would inherit the Market Street prop-
erty at the boys’ expense. Had Sutton any doubts that Sara believed the boys
remained as primary beneficiaries, such doubts should have been dispelled
by her persistent inquiries regarding the central asset of the Sanders estate.
Sara’s questions about the absence of the Market Street property from the
financial statements, the possible changes in the value of the property, and
the tax obligations she and the boys might incur, clearly presuppose a be-
quest of the property. Sutton made no effort to disabuse her of this view.
Instead, he either evaded her inquiries altogether, or reassured her that
everything was in order and that he was protecting the boys’ interests.

  By misrepresentation and concealment Sutton led appellants to believe
their interests in the estate remained unchanged. The objectives of his de-
ception are apparent. He told Sara on more than one occasion that he would
take care of everything and that she had no reason to contact the attorney
who was handling the probate proceedings. He repeatedly emphasized that
she had no responsibilities in the matter and that he would contact her if
her involvement was necessary. He specifically told her she need not attend
the hearing on the petition for final distribution. This conduct seems clearly
intended to prevent appellants from appearing to contest the will.

  In Larrabee v. Tracy, supra, 21 Cal.2d 645, the executor led a beneficiary
to believe she would receive her mother’s share of the estate by right of
representation. Without notifying the beneficiary of his change in position,
the executor asked the probate court to distribute the legacy to himself. In
a unanimous decision authored by Chief Justice Gibson, this court held that
the conduct constituted extrinsic fraud. “[The executor’s] conduct effective-
ly prevented Mrs. Larrabee from obtaining a fair adversary hearing and, in
our opinion, affords ample justification for the granting of equitable relief.
As executor of the estate and its residuary legatee appellant had a clear duty
to refrain from taking an unfair advantage of the impression he had created.”
(I- d., at p. 650.)

  Sutton’s conduct is also similar to that at issue in Craney v. Low (1956)
46 Cal.2d 757 [298 P.2d 860]. In that case, plaintiff was the elderly mother
of the decedent. Defendant, the decedent’s widow, told plaintiff that she
618



need not retain an attorney because defendant would keep plaintiff informed
of the probate proceedings and would do everything possible to protect her
interests in the estate. This court found the allegations sufficient to show
extrinsic fraud even though defendant was not executor and did not owe
plaintiff a fiduciary duty in that capacity. The court implicitly relied solely
on the breach of a confidential relationship. “Sufficient facts are alleged to
show that plaintiff relied upon the representations made by [defendant] and
that the deception practiced on her prevented her appearance in the probate
proceedings.” (Id., at p. 759.)

   The facts of this case are also not unlike the facts in Duffy v. Duffy (1947)
82 Cal.App.2d 203 [186 P.2d 61]. In that case the decedent left a will
devising his entire estate to a minor nephew and niece. The decedent’s
brother, who was also the uncle of the beneficiaries, was appointed execu-
tor. The minor beneficiaries alleged that the uncle represented to their moth-
er that he would take care of everything and would protect their interests in
the estate. Instead he presented an adverse claim. The court noted that the
uncle bore a fiduciary duty to the minor beneficiaries as a member of the
family, as trustee of a testamentary trust created by the decedent for the
beneficiaries, and as executor of the estate—the same relationships alleged
by appellants in the present case. The court held that “the nephew and
niece, by reason of the blood and other confidential relationships, had the
right to rely upon their uncle’s representation that he would take care of
their interests in the estate. It was those representations that kept them from
appearing in the estate, and if, as alleged, they were false, it constitutes
extrinsic fraud.” (Id., at p. 208.)

  In the present case, respondent argues that he fulfilled his responsibilities
by ensuring that the estate was administered in an orderly manner and that
appellants received all legal notices. He claims appellants never requested
to see a copy of the will and that “it isn’t the duty of the Executor to see
that distributees under a will get all that they think they should have received
or that they were expecting to receive.”9

   9Respondent cites only Stevens v. Torregano (1961) 192 Cal.App.2d 105 [13 Cal.Rptr.
604] in support of his argument. To the extent that case is relevant, it is directly contrary
to respondent’s position. In Stevens, the plaintiff alleged that she was a pretermitted heir of
the decedent and that the defendant, a legatee under the will, concealed her identity from
the executor. The court found that the defendant had not committed extrinsic fraud. It
observed that under settled law a legatee is not under a duty to notify other heirs of the
decedent’s death or of the probate proceedings. (Id., at p. 123.) The court also noted that
plaintiff had not alleged that defendant had ever been asked about the existence of other
heirs. (Id., at pp. 119, 125.) Most importantly for our case, the court found no allegations
of a confidential or fiduciary relationship which would have placed a duty on the defendant
to make a full disclosure. (Id., at pp. 123-124.)
  The court also found that the executor had fulfilled its duties. The court noted that the
                                                                                         619



  Respondent’s argument may be based on his erroneous view that he was
not in a confidential or fiduciary relationship with appellants. It is clear that
where such relationships exist, and where the fiduciary has led the aggrieved
party to believe that his interests will be protected, receipt of legal notice
of the proceeding will not preclude equitable relief. The aggrieved party
has a right to rely on the trust created by the special relationship and may
assume that the fiduciary will abide by his duty to act in good faith.

  In summary, appellants’ undisputed affidavit shows that respondent led
them to believe the will offered for probate would leave the entire estate to
them. He concealed the fact that he had arranged for the decedent to change
her will to leave most of the estate to him. He also assured appellants that
he would represent their interests. Relying on their confidential and fidu-
ciary relationship, appellants were lulled into a sense of security by respon-
dent’s representations. As if to insure the success of his plan, respondent
expressly told appellants that they need not become involved in the probate
proceedings and advised them not to contact the probate attorney. These
allegations, if true, clearly show extrinsic fraud.

  The order is reversed and the cause remanded to the trial court for further
proceedings in accordance with this opinion.

  Bird, C. J., Mosk, J., Reynoso, J., Grodin, J., Lucas, J., and Kaus, J.,*
concurred.

  On March 13, 1986, the opinion was modified to read as printed above.




executor had provided all notices required by law. An executor has no duty to search out
unknown heirs. (Id.., at p. 122.) It is also generally accepted that ignorance on the part of
an executor of the existence of an heir does not constitute extrinsic mistake. (Ibid.) The
court concluded, however, that plaintiff would have been entitled to equitable relief had she
alleged that the executor knew of her existence. “This is because the executor is a fiduciary,
and silence on the part of a fiduciary, who is under a duty to speak, is fraud.” (Id., at
p. 123.)
   *Retired Associate Justice of the Supreme Court sitting under assignment by the Chair-
person of the Judicial Council.
