                                                                                          1017




[No. B123313. Second Dist., Div. Four. Mar. 8, 2002.]

AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC., Plaintiff and Appellant, v.
SHEPPARD, MULLIN, RICHTER & HAMPTON et al., Defendants and
Appellants.

[Opinion certified for partial publication.*]




  * Pursuant to California Rules of Court, rules 976(b) and 976.1, this opinion is certified for
publication with the exception of parts I.B and I.C and II.B through n.D of the Discussion.
1018
1019
1020
1021
 1022




Counsel

Lurie & Zepeda, Kurt L. Schmalz, L. Kimberly Pepper and Donna M. Dean
for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Munger, Tolles & Olson, Brad D. Brian, Rita J. Miller and Steven W.
Hawkins for Defendants and Appellants.


Opinion

VOGEL (C. S.), P. J.

                              Introduction

   In 1990, plaintiff American Airlines, Inc. (American) retained defendants
Gregory A. Long (Long) and his law firm, Sheppard, Mullin, Richter &
Hampton (SMRH), to represent it regarding a specific model of aircraft it
contracted to purchase from McDonnell Douglas Corporation (MDC). After
 1990, ADO Finance A.G. (ADO), another purchaser of the same model of
aircraft from MDC, commenced suit against MDC asserting the aircraft did
not meet specifications. In pursuit of its claims against MDC, ADO initiated
discovery to obtain production of documents related to American’s contract
with MDC. American engaged defendants to represent it in connection with
the discovery proceeding in the ADO/MDC lawsuit. Defendants, over
American’s objection, accepted employment with ADO whereby Long
would serve as ADO’s designated deposition witness. American participated
in the deposition, objected to Long’s involvement, and Long was eventually
disqualified.
                                                                          1023




  American sued defendants on various theories, contending that defendants
accepted representation that was adverse to American. The matter ultimately
was tried, and a jury found defendants liable for breach of fiduciary duty and
professional negligence.

  On appeal, American contends that the trial court erred in the following
particulars: (1) granting a motion for summary adjudication on its claim for
punitive damages; (2) striking various claims from American’s complaint;
(3) limiting the evidence with regard to the damages awardable to American;
and (4) awarding costs and expert witness fees to defendants based on
American’s refusal of a Code of Civil Procedure section 998 offer of
settlement.

   Defendants filed a cross-appeal, contending that the evidence did not, as a
matter of law, support the jury’s verdict finding them liable for breach of
fiduciary duty. They further contend that the damages awarded constituted
an improper award of attorney fees.

   In the published portions of this opinion, we conclude: (1) as a matter of
law, the evidence supported the jury’s finding that defendants breached their
fiduciary duty (pt. I.A); (2) however, there existed no triable issues of
material fact which would support a finding by clear and convincing evi-
dence that defendants should be held liable for punitive damages (pt. II.A);
and (3) Code of Civil Procedure section 998 requires under the circum-
stances present here that defendants recover their costs incurred after plain-
tiff rejected their settlement offer (pt. II.E). In the unpublished portions of
this opinion (pts. I.B and I.C and II.B through II.D), we find no reversible
error as to the remaining contentions raised by the parties. Accordingly, we
affirm the judgment and the postjudgment award of costs.

                 Factual   and   Procedural    Background


   In August 1989, American entered into an agreement with MDC to
purchase MD-11 aircraft. In July 1990, dissatisfied with the performance of
the aircraft and particularly with how much weight it could carry and how
far it could fly without refueling (its “payload capacity” and “range”),
American hired Long and SMRH to advise it with regard to whether it had
claims or remedies against MDC with respect to its purchase of the MD-
ll’s. Long drafted a complaint against MDC for fraud and breach of
contract, but the complaint was never filed.

  During late 1992 and 1993, American entered into settlement discussions
with MDC. Long participated minimally in reviewing and revising “letter
  1024




agreements” on behalf of American, by which MDC was required to fix
specific problems with the MD-11’s on an ongoing basis. The settlement
ultimately reached was confidential, and both parties were prohibited from
releasing the settlement documents or disclosing the terms of the settlement
to third parties. Long and SMRH were not informed of the final resolution of
the matter or the settlement terms.

  In May 1993, ADO, a Swiss aircraft broker, filed a civil action against
MDC in United States District Court, alleging MDC had failed to deliver
MD-11 aircraft capable of performing according to the representations made
by MDC as to payload capacity and range. ADO was represented in the
matter by James Wawro, Anthony Russo, and their law firm Morgan, Lewis
& Bockius (MLB).

   When the ADO suit was pending, Long and SMRH were representing
MLB, Wawro, and Russo in unrelated litigation.1 Wawro and Russo even-
tually were dismissed as individual defendants in that action on January 7,
1994, although representation of MLB continued thereafter.

    In the latter part of 1993, Long and Wawro discussed Wawro’s represen-
tation of ADO against MDC. Wawro knew Long previously had represented
Continental Airlines in litigation against MDC. In October 1993, at Wawro’s
request, Long sent him copies of discovery requests Long had used repre-
senting Continental Airlines against MDC. Wawro also asked for and re-
ceived Long’s advice on potential expert witnesses to use in the ADO
litigation. Wawro testified at his deposition: “I think [Long] mentioned that
he represented American Airlines in 1991.” Wawro did not recall Long
mentioning at that time that his representation of American was in connec-
tion with the MD-11 aircraft.

   In early February 1994, the discovery master in the ADO litigation
ordered MDC to produce to ADO some documents related to American’s
dealings with MDC regarding the MD-11. As a courtesy to American,
occasioned by the fact MLB represented American in other unrelated mat-
ters, American was allowed to review the MDC documents in advance of
their production.2 After American learned of the court order for production
by MDC of confidential, American-related documents, it asked Long on
January 28, 1994, to advise it in connection with the document request, and
to oppose the production of documents as appropriate.
   1 Long and SMRH defended MLB in various unrelated legal malpractice litigation through-
out the period of 1991 to 1996.
   2 American told Long that MLB did substantial work for American and that American might
seek MLB’s disqualification; it never did so. Wawro did not think the Los Angeles office of
MLB represented American, rather that the Washington and maybe Philadelphia offices did.
                                                                                          1025




   Long accepted American’s engagement and from February 1994 to July
 1995, Long personally spent 40 hours reviewing American documents sub-
ject to production in the ADO litigation. Long prepared indices of those
documents, and he gave Wawro at least some of these indices to obtain
MLB’s agreement to avoid or limit production of all or some of American’s
documents. The documents eventually produced by MDC were subject to a
protective order that included an “attorney’s eyes only” provision.

  Long completed his review of the American-related documents in July
1995. He did not receive any additional work from American with regard to
the ADO litigation until early February 1996.

  Sometime during the second half of 1995, ADO’s lawyers mentioned to
Long the possibility of his being a Federal Rules of Civil Procedure rule
30(b)(6) (28 U.S.C.) witness for ADO without specifically asking him to do
so.3

   Around February 6, 1996, the magistrate in the ADO litigation ordered
ADO to designate a federal rule 30(b)(6) witness; the individual previously
designated by ADO to testify in that role had been unable to answer many of
the questions asked by MDC. ADO had no employees who could serve that
purpose, so MLB immediately created a list of 10 to 15 candidates who
might serve as its designee, one of whom was Long.

   On February 15, 1996, Wawro called Long and asked him to determine
whether American would voluntarily produce documents to ADO or consent
to being served in California with a document subpoena. Long relayed the
inquiry to American on that date. Kathryn Koorenny, in-house counsel for
American, believed MLB did not need American’s consent to serve a
subpoena, but told Long that American would not volunteer to accept service
in California. She asked Long to advise her on whether American should
prepare some legal strategy to prevent or limit ADO’s obtaining American’s
documents, many of which she characterized as confidential and proprietary.

  On February 21,1996, following a telephone conversation with Koorenny,
Long dictated a letter to Wawro regarding American’s position concerning
production of its documents. The letter was transcribed and sent on February
23,1996. The letter stated: “American is willing to accept a subpoena served
on CT Corporation, its registered agent for the service of process in the State
   3 As we will discuss, the function of such a witness is to testify on behalf of a corporation
or other organization as to matters known or reasonably available to the organization, and
specifically as to those matters described in the deposition notice. All further references to
federal rule 30(b)(6) are to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (28 U.S.C.).
 1026



of California. It does so with the understanding that you will discuss with
American any objections that it might have to the subpoena duces tecum
and, if those objections cannot be resolved to American’s satisfaction, ADO
will withdraw the California subpoena. Following!] that, ADO agrees to
obtain a new subpoena directed to American Airlines from the United States
District Court in Fort Worth, Texas and to serve the subpoena in Texas.”
Thereafter, Long told Koorenny that ADO had agreed not to subpoena
American’s documents “for now.”4

   No later than February 20, 1996, Wawro asked Long to serve as the
federal rule 30(b)(6) witness for ADO in its litigation against MDC. At trial
Long was asked when in 1996 did Wawro first talk to him about being a rule
30(b)(6) witness. He replied that it was the 20th or 21st of February, but not
before the 20th, “[bjecause I know that we reached the conclusion of my go
between services with Morgan Lewis on the one hand and American Airline
[ric] on the other before he raised that issue.” Wawro testified at trial that it
was 10 days to 2 weeks after the magistrate ruled on February 6th that ADO
had to produce another rule 30(b)(6) deponent before he spoke to Long
about serving in that capacity.

   On February 20, 1996, a letter was sent by telecopier, from Wawro to a
Carl Stadelhofer in Switzerland, “confirming] your advice that ADO desires
to retain Gregory A. Long ... to act on its behalf as ADO’s federal rule
30(b)(6) deponent. Unless you advise differently immediately, I will proceed
to get Greg started on this project.” Also on February 20, Wawro sent Long
a letter by messenger enclosing the rule 30(b)(6) deposition notice, ADO’s
first amended complaint, and various other pleadings, noting, “Let’s discuss
when you have a chance.”

    During the last few days of February or early March 1996, Long told
Koorenny that ADO had asked him to be its federal rule 30(b)(6) witness.
Koorenny said she would speak to her supervisor, David Schwarte, about
whether American would agree to waive the conflict of interest. Long and
Koorenny had several conversations about the possibility of Long’s serving
as ADO’s rule 30(b)(6) spokesperson. Koorenny expressed concern that
Long could be disqualified from doing future work for American in the ADO
litigation, and that he could reveal confidential information. She expressed
the concern on behalf of American that MDC would take the position, if
American consented to Long’s testifying on behalf of ADO, that American
had waived its attorney-client privilege.
  4 On February 16, 1996, however, ADO had served on MDC a sixth request for production
of documents, seeking additional American-related documents created through March 19,
1996.
                                                                                       1027




   Long told Russo of MLB that American’s concern was that it might need
Long’s services in the future if subpoenaed by ADO. In response ADO told
Long it would agree not to subpoena American. Long said American also
was concerned that MDC might subpoena American’s documents. American
therefore wanted a waiver from ADO to allow Long to respond to a
subpoena from MDC and for ADO to waive any objection based on Long’s
service as ADO’s federal rule 30(b)(6) witness. ADO signed a waiver letter,
which Long sent to Koorenny on March 7, 1996.5 The letter waived any
conflicts and consented to Long’s representation of American, but it did not
include the oral representation of ADO’s counsel to Long that ADO would
not serve a subpoena or document request on American in the future.
Koorenny did not understand at that time that ADO had agreed never to
subpoena American’s documents, but rather she understood that it might do
so in the future. Before then, ADO’s attorneys apparently had told Long they
would not enforce a subpoena served on American if American objected but,
according to Koorenny, Long did not share that information with American.
Koorenny was concerned about the waiver letter’s inclusion of the following
reference: “similar issues may arise in the future because of document
production requests directed to MDC, subpoenas directed to American Air-
lines, rulings of the Court, etc.” and remained concerned that American
would receive further demands for the production of documents. On March
7, 1996, Koorenny told Long that American would not agree to his employ-
ment as ADO’s rule 30(b)(6) deponent. Additional conversations between
the two occurred but American’s decision did not change.

  Long did not feel that he needed American’s permission to serve as
ADO’s federal rule 30(b)(6) deponent. After consulting with the ethics
committee of SMRH, Long decided to accept the engagement to serve as
ADO’s rule 30(b)(6) deponent. Defendants concluded that the work would
not be adverse to American and Long had no confidential information from
American that was material to the rule 30(b)(6) deposition. Long formally

    5 The waiver letter, addressed to Long, stated; “This will acknowledge that you have
previously represented American Airlines with respect to issues which have arisen in this
litigation regarding the production by [MDC] of documents relating to American Airlines.
This will further acknowledge that similar issues may arise in the future because of document
production requests directed to MDC, subpoenas directed to American Airlines, rulings of the
Court, etc. [¶] ADO hereby waives any conflict that exists, may exist or may arise from your
serving as a Rule 30(b)(6) deponent on behalf of ADO and your past, continued and future
service as an attorney on behalf of American Airlines with respect to issues which may arise
in this case. ADO also specifically agrees that you may continue to serve as an attorney for
American Airlines with respect to such issues and that ADO will not assert any conflict
against you, your law firm or American Airlines with respect to your representation of
American Airlines.”
  1028




accepted the engagement on March 11, 1996, and began preparing to testify
for ADO.6

   On March 14, 1996, Long wrote a letter to Koorenny at American stating
he had completed his work for American and was agreeing to be ADO’s
federal rule 30(b)(6) representative. The letter was received by Koorenny on
March 18, 1996. In the letter, Long stated: “MDC has completed its produc-
tion of American Airlines related documents. Thus, I do not anticipate that I
or my firm will play any additional role in connection with that matter.” In
addition: “ADO has informed me that it has not served a subpoena for the
production of documents on American Airlines and that it does not intend to
do so. Therefore, I do not anticipate that either I or my firm will be required
to represent American Airlines with respect to any document dispute be-
tween it and ADO. I am not aware of any dispute that exists between ADO
on the one hand and American Airlines on the other, and should any such
dispute arise in the future, ADO has waived its right to dispute the involve-
ment of me or my firm on behalf of American Airlines.” “ADO has
requested that I act as a Rule 30(b)(6) witness in response to a notice served
by MDC that requests information which is limited to ADO’s dealings with
MDC. MDC has not requested any confidential information that we learned
from American Airlines. I do not believe that MDC can do so, and will not
use any such information or reveal it during this engagement. . . . [W]e
will refuse to reveal to any third party any privileged information which we
have learned from American Airlines in the course of our representation of
American Airlines. I see no conflict of interest between ADO and American
which is not a party to the litigation, and I intend to accept ADO’s request.”

   When MDC learned ADO was designating Long as a federal rule 30(b)(6)
witness, MDC wrote to ADO on March 19, 1996, objecting on the basis
there was a conflict of interest given Long’s prior representation of Ameri-
can. The matter was brought to the attention of the special master, who
“expressed some concern regarding the ethical problems,” but ADO did not
withdraw Long as its rule 30(b)(6) deponent. Around April 1, 1996, MDC
served on Long and SMRH subpoenas seeking copies of all MDC documents
Long reviewed on behalf of American in connection with the ADO litiga-
tion, and of all notes he made pertaining to his review of those documents.
Defendants filed objections with the court and refused to turn over any
documents related to American, arguing they were privileged and irrelevant
to the rule 30(b)(6) deposition.

   The rule 30(b)(6) deposition occurred on April 9, 1996, with Koorenny in
attendance. MDC’s questioning focused on information Long had previously
  6 In agreeing to work for ADO, Long made clear that he would not discuss any information
he learned during the course of his representation of American.
                                                                                       1029




obtained from American. According to defendants, it appeared to be MDC’s
strategy to seek the disqualification of Long as ADO’s spokesperson and to
induce the discovery master to issue terminating sanctions against ADO.

  At the deposition, ADO’s counsel objected to MDC’s questions relating to
American as being irrelevant, not reasonably calculated to lead to the
discovery of admissible evidence, and beyond the scope of the notice. Long
asserted the attorney-client privilege as to all questions related to American
and did not disclose information he obtained during the course of his
representation of American. Koorenny conceded no such information was
disclosed by Long during the deposition. MDC apparently terminated the
deposition based on Long’s refusal to answer questions regarding his knowl-
edge obtained while representing American.

   ADO filed with the special master a motion for a protective order to
preclude another request by MDC for a federal rule 30(b)(6) deposition, and
sought sanctions against MDC for what it alleged to be misconduct in
terminating the deposition after asking Long for irrelevant information
regarding what he learned about the MD-11 through representing American.
MDC in turn sought terminating sanctions against ADO for violating the
court’s order to produce a suitable rule 30(b)(6) deponent. American filed a
declaration by Koorenny objecting to Long’s acting as a representative for
ADO, detailing American’s position that Long’s doing so presented a con-
flict of interest. In opposition, Long filed a responsive declaration explaining
why his conduct did not violate any duty he owed to American, and offering
to participate in an in camera hearing to discuss the relationship between
American and his law firm. The special master declined to hold an in camera
hearing. Koorenny filed a second declaration addressing and refuting state-
ments made in Long’s declaration, and also filed a motion on behalf of
American to intervene in the matter.

   After holding a hearing on the matter, on May 27,1996, the special master
issued an order denying ADO’s motion for a protective order and sanctions.7
The special master concluded: “The mere potential for ethical violations and
Long’s continuing duty to keep American’s confidences and privileges
would severely hamper Long’s role as an effective 30(b)(6) witness for
ADO. To test the reliability of a witness who has familiarity with the case
not available to ADO, MDC would have a right to explore what information
Long received prior to his education from ADO and what information he had
from his prior representation. Long’s duty to American does not allow him
   7 During the hearing, the special master clarified she was not finding Long had or had not
violated a rule of professional conduct.
 1030




to testify as to any of this information. Moreover, Long refused to reaffirm
the prior testimony given at the deposition for fear of violating his duty to
American Airlines. Thus, Long cannot properly serve as a Rule 30(b)(6)
witness. It was ADO’s responsibility to explore the potential conflict when it
was brought to counsel’s attention by MDC and the Special Master well
before ADO expended time and effort to ‘educate’ Mr. Long. The Motion
for Protective Order is totally without merit.”

   On May 30, 1996, MDC produced additional documents to ADO, includ-
ing some American-related documents, in response to ADO’s sixth request
for production of documents (served Feb. 16, 1996) by which ADO sought
from MDC all American-related documents created through March 19, 1996.

  On June 2, 1996, ADO dismissed its case against MDC pursuant to a
confidential settlement agreement.

   In October 1996, American brought the present action against Long and
SMRH for breach of fiduciary duty (based on breach of the duty of loyalty,
failure to preserve confidential information, and improper termination of the
attorney-client relationship), professional negligence, and misappropriation
of trade secrets. American twice amended the complaint, first to add a
constructive trust theory to its cause of action for breach of fiduciary duty,
and then to allege a breach of fiduciary duty based on defendants’ failure to
properly disclose the existence of their attorney-client relationship with
MLB, Wawro, and Russo.

   Defendants successfully moved to strike American’s allegation seeking
constructive trust relief and its request for private attorney general attorney
fees. The trial court granted the motion to strike without leave to amend.

  In addition, defendants successfully moved for summary adjudication of
American’s claim for punitive damages. The trial court also granted defend-
ants’ motion for summary adjudication of American’s cause of action for
misappropriation of trade secrets. American does not appeal from the latter
ruling.

   Defendants served an offer to compromise pursuant to Code of Civil
Procedure section 998, offering to pay American $59,200 if American would
dismiss its lawsuit with prejudice. The offer did not provide for entry of
judgment in favor of American. American did not accept the offer.

  Before trial, the court granted defendants’ motion in limine seeking to
preclude American from seeking a refund of the attorney fees paid to
                                                                         1031




defendants before the date defendants allegedly breached their fiduciary
duty.

   During trial, the court granted defendants’ motion for directed verdict,
leaving only two issues for the jury: whether American sustained any
actionable injury or damages or may recover against defendants as a result of
Long’s serving as a federal rule 30(b)(6) witness, and whether plaintiff
sustained any actionable injury or damage or may recover against defendants
as the result of defendants’ allegedly turning over the document indices to
Wawro in the ADO litigation.

   The jury was instructed not to consider whether American could recover
for the costs of educating a new law firm to handle a dispute with MDC over
the MD-11, or whether American could recover against defendants because
they failed to tell American of defendants’ representation of Wawro, Russo,
or MLB.

   The jury, by a nine-to-three vote, found defendants breached their fidu-
ciary duty to American and were negligent in accepting the ADO employ-
ment. The jury awarded American damages of $8,174. The jury found that
defendants did not breach a fiduciary duty or commit negligence by giving
the document indices to Wawro.

  The court ruled defendants’ offer to settle pursuant to Code of Civil
Procedure section 998 shifted costs to American, and awarded defendants
$126,022.79, including $58,787.50 in expert witness fees. This amount was
offset by American’s monetary damages award ($8,174) and an award of the
costs incurred by American prior to the Code of Civil Procedure section 998
offer ($26,815.16), which together totaled $34,989.16. The net result was an
award of $91,033.63 in favor of defendants.

   After American’s posttrial motions for a new trial and for judgment
notwithstanding the verdict were denied, the present appeal and cross-appeal
followed.

                                 Discussion

   To provide the proper context for the discussion of each party’s conten-
tions, we depart from the traditional approach of first discussing the appeal.
Instead, we first address the primary issue raised on defendants’ cross-
appeal: whether, as a matter of law, Long and SMRH breached their
fiduciary duty to American. This core issue drives the analysis of the
remaining assignments of error.
  1032




                                I. Issues on Cross-appeal

A. Breach of Fiduciary Duty Based on Violation of State Bar Rules of
Professional Conduct
    1. Rule 3-310(C)

          American argued at trial that defendants violated rule 3-310(C) of
the State Bar Rules of Professional Conduct (hereafter Rule 3-310(C)), and
on that basis the jury could find that they had breached fiduciary duties owed
to American. It is well established that an attorney’s duties to his client are
governed by the Rules of Professional Conduct, and that those rules, to-
gether with statutes and general principles relating to other fiduciary rela-
tionships, “help define the duty component of the fiduciary duty which an
attorney owes to his client.” (Mirabito v. Liccardo (1992) 4 Cal.App.4th 41,
45 [5 Cal.Rptr.2d 571].)

   As applicable here, Rule 3-310(C) provides as follows: “A member shall
not, without the informed written consent of each client: [¶] (1) Accept
representation of more than one client in a matter in which the interests of
the clients potentially conflict; or [¶] (2) Accept or continue representation
of more than one client in a matter in which the interests of the clients
actually conflict. . . .”

  Defendants argue that application of this rule requires the offending
member must have a lawyer-client relationship with both adverse parties.
They cite In re Lee G. (1991) 1 Cal.App.4th 17, 27 [1 Cal.Rptr.2d 375] in
support of the proposition that “ ‘ “represented” ’ by the attorney [in Rule
3-310 means] ‘in a manner giving rise to [a lawyer-client] relationship.’ ”
They contend that because Long merely served ADO as a federal rule
30(b)(6) witness, there was no attorney-client relationship and thus there
could be no violation of Rule 3-310(C).8

        We disagree. Application of Rule 3-310(C) does not require repre-
sentation of both clients as an attorney. The discussion section which
   8 Defendants’ citation of In re Lee G., supra, 1 Cal.App.4th 17, 27, is misplaced. The Lee G.
court merely stated that Rule 3-310 “never becomes applicable where the party seeking the
attorney’s disqualification fails to establish that such party was or is ‘ “represented” ’ by the
attorney ‘in a manner giving rise to an attorney-client relationship.’ (Civil Service Com. v.
Superior Court (1984) 163 Cal.App.3d 70, 77 [209 Cal.Rptr. 159].)” (In re Lee G., supra, at
p. 27, italics added [party, subject to conservatorship,      seeking disqualification of county
counsel, did not have constructive attorney-client relationship with her conservator’s desig-
nated attorney, county counsel].) There is no dispute that American and Long had an
attorney-client relationship.
                                                                                    1033




follows Rule 3-310 states: “Subparagraphs (C)(1) and (C)(2) are intended to
apply to all types of legal employment, including the concurrent representa-
tion of multiple parties in litigation or in a single transaction or in some
other common enterprise or legal relationship.”

   William H. Raley Co. v. Superior Court (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1042 [197
Cal.Rptr. 232] is illustrative. There, the Court of Appeal issued a peremptory
writ of mandate directing the trial court to grant a defendant’s motion to
disqualify a law firm in the following situation. Rupert Gilbert Carroll had
sued William H. Raley Co., Inc. The law firm of Gray, Cary, Ames & Frye
represented the plaintiff Carroll. The defendant moved to disqualify the
plaintiff’s counsel. Its motion was based on the fact that a partner of the
Gray, Cary firm, Karl ZoBell, was also a director of the La Jolla Bank &
Trust Company. The bank, in turn, was trustee of the William H. Raley
Testamentary Trust, which held 100 percent of the Raley corporation com-
mon stock. ZoBell was also a member of the bank’s trust investment
committee.9 The bank’s trust investment committee and its board of direc-
tors had authority to settle lawsuits involving wholly owned companies such
as the Raley corporation. The Gray, Cary firm also represented the bank in
various corporate matters, though it did not represent the bank as trustee.
Thus, the Gray, Cary firm represented Carroll, and simultaneously included
among its partners a member of the governing entity responsible for settling
lawsuits on behalf of the Raley corporation. Based upon these facts, the
Raley corporation moved to disqualify the Gray, Cary firm from represent-
ing Carroll.

    In first determining whether a conflict of interest existed, the Court of
 Appeal looked to State Bar Rules of Professional Conduct former rule
 5-102(B), the predecessor of Rule 3-310. Former rule 5-102(B) provided:
 “ ‘A member of the State Bar shall not represent conflicting interests, except
 with the written consent of all parties concerned.’ ” (William H. Raley Co. v.
 Superior Court, supra, 149 Cal.App.3d at p. 1046.) The court concluded the
 situation before it presented a conflict of interest, stating as follows: “Pro-
fessional responsibilities do not turn on whether a member of the State Bar
 acts as a lawyer. ‘One who is licensed to practice as an attorney in this state
 must conform to the professional standards in whatever capacity he may be
 acting in a particular matter. [Citation.]’ (Libarian v. State Bar (1943) 21
 Cal.2d 862, 865 [136 P.2d 321]; accord, Baron v. City of Los Angeles (1970)
 2 Cal.3d 535, 542 [86 Cal.Rptr. 673, 469 P.2d 353, 42 A.L.R.3d 1036].)
Thus the scope of former rule 5-102(B) includes conflicts of interest arising
   9 The court specifically noted that ZoBell did not hold either of these positions as an
attorney. (William H. Raley Co. v. Superior Court, supra, 149 Cal.App.3d at p. 1045.)
  1034




other than in the course of legal representation. ‘[A] conflict of interest
[under former rule 5-102(B)] may arise from an attorney’s relationship with
a nonclient. Such a conflict of interest may arise [1] where an attorney’s
relationship with a person or entity creates an expectation that the attorney
owes a duty of fidelity. It may also arise [2] where the attorney has acquired
confidential information in the course of such a relationship which will be,
or may appear to the person or entity to be, useful in the attorney’s
representation in an action on behalf of a client.’ (Cal. Compendium on
Professional Responsibility . . . , State Bar Formal Opinion No. 1981-63, p.
3.)” (William H. Raley Co. v. Superior Court, supra, 149 Cal.App.3d at pp.
1046-1047, italics added, fn. omitted.)

          Long’s role as a federal rule 30(b)(6) deponent on behalf of ADO
involved his being privy to and therefore able to testify about a vast amount
of information “known or reasonably available to the organization,” regard-
ing everything from the corporate structure of ADO to the nature of its
contentions against MDC and the source of its knowledge giving rise to such
contentions.10 There is no doubt that as ADO’s rule 30(b)(6) representative,
Long, acted as ADO’s agent, and in that capacity owed fiduciary duties to
ADO. An agent is a fiduciary. (Michelson v. Hamada (1994) 29 Cal.App.4th
 1566, 1579 [36 Cal.Rptr.2d 343].) “ ‘Confidential and fiduciary relations are,
in law, synonymous, and may be said to exist whenever trust and confidence
is reposed by one person in the integrity and fidelity of another. . . .’” (Id.
at p. 1581, citations omitted.) As ADO’s fiduciary, Long was required to act
in ADO’s best interests. The situation clearly presented a potential for a
conflict of interest to arise. Long was obligated to act as ADO’s witness and
to answer the questions put to him at the deposition to the best of his ability,
and to avoid being found an inadequate rule 30(b)(6) deponent. As Ameri-
can’s attorney, he also was obligated to preserve American’s confidences.
Thus, regardless of whether or not he was giving legal advice to ADO, the
situation presented a conflict between the fiduciary duties owed to ADO and
those owed to American. (See Morrison Knudsen Corp. v. Hancock, Rothert
& Bunshoft (1999) 69 Cal.App.4th 223, 230 [81 Cal.Rptr.2d 425].)

  We hold that the circumstances presented here fall within the purview of
the prohibition of Rule 3-310(C), even though the attorney (Long) was not
   10 Federal rule 30(b)(6) provides in relevant part: “A party may in the party’s notice and in
a subpoena name as the deponent a public or private corporation or a partnership or
association or governmental agency and describe with reasonable particularity the matters on
which examination is requested. In that event, the organization so named shall designate one
or more officers, directors, or managing agents, or other persons who consent to testify on its
behalf, and may set forth, for each person designated, the matters on which the person will
testify. A subpoena shall advise a non-party organization of its duty to make such a
designation. The persons so designated shall testify as to matters known or reasonably
available to the organization. This subdivision (b)(6) does not preclude taking a deposition by
any other procedure authorized.”
                                                                                           1035




engaged to render legal advice to ADO. For purposes of the rule and the
perils it seeks to avoid, Long’s acting as a federal rule 30(b)(6) representa-
tive for ADO placed him in a position of trust where he could be compelled
to choose which of two conflicting loyalties he would honor. Defendants’
challenge, as a matter of law, to the jury’s finding that defendants breached
their fiduciary duty by violating Rule 3-310(C) must fail.

   After the completion of briefing, defendants brought to our attention a
recent case decided by a federal district court, Commonwealth Ins. Co. v.
Stone Container Corp. (N.D.Ill. 2001) 178 F.Supp.2d 938. In that case,
Stromberg, a lawyer in a firm’s Los Angeles office represented the Stone
corporation in a transactional matter involving a joint venture in China.
Sugarman, a lawyer in the firm’s San Francisco office, was then engaged by
Aon Risk Services, Inc., to serve as an expert witness in litigation between
Aon and Stone. Sugarman was to provide expert testimony on the previous
insurance litigation strategy and positions taken by Stone in pursuit of
insurance coverage. Stone filed a motion seeking to disqualify Sugarman
pursuant to American Bar Association Model Rules of Professional Conduct,
rules 1.7 and 1.10.11

   In denying the motion to disqualify Sugarman, the district court noted that
the rules speak only to situations involving the “representation” of clients in
an attorney-client relationship. The court concluded that a law firm under-
taking the role of testifying expert does not form an attorney-client relation-
ship and thus the rules do not apply. “Without a request for legal advice or
any expectation of confidentiality, we find that the engagement between
testifying expert and the retaining party does not form an attorney-client
relationship within the meaning of the ethical rules.” (Commonwealth Ins.
Co. v. Stone Container Corp., supra, 178 F.Supp.2d at p. 945.)

   The court based its denial of the motion to disqualify on its conclusion
that rule 1.7 of the American Bar Association Model Rules of Professional
Conduct by its express terms did not apply because: (1) although Aon and
Stone were directly adverse in the litigation at issue, they were not directly
    11 Rule1.7(a) provides that a lawyer shall not represent a client if such representation will
be directly adverse to another client, unless the lawyer reasonably believes the representation
will not adversely affect the relationship with the other client, and each client consents after
disclosure. Rule 1.7(b) provides that a lawyer shall not represent a client if such representa-
tion may be materially limited by the lawyer’s responsibilities to another client or to a third
person, or by the lawyer’s own interests, unless the lawyer reasonably believes the represen-
tation will not be adversely affected and the client consents after disclosure. Rule 1.10
provides that no lawyer associated with a firm shall represent a client when the lawyer knows
or reasonably should know that another lawyer associated with that firm would be prohibited
from doing so.
  1036



adverse with respect to the law firm’s representation of Stone in the China
deal and its engagement with Aon as an expert witness; and (2) by its terms,
rule 1.7(b) applies only to a situation in which a lawyer first is engaged as a
testifying expert, and then later seeks to represent a client in a matter in
which the lawyer’s responsibilities to the former might materially limit his
or her representation of the latter. (Commonwealth Ins. Co. v. Stone Con-
tainer Corp., supra, 178 F.Supp.2d at pp. 945-946.)

   Finally, despite concluding that rule 1.7 of the American Bar Association
Model Rules of Professional Conduct by its express terms did not apply, the
 court found it necessary to look at the substance or “spirit,” rather than the
form, of the ethical rules to determine whether the law firm’s engagement as
 a testifying expert for Aon breached its duty of loyalty to Stone as a
concurrently represented client, or created an appearance of impropriety.
 (Commonwealth Ins. Co. v. Stone Container Corp., supra, 178 F.Supp.2d at p.
946.) The court stated, “As we read the Comment to Rule 1.7, the duty of
loyalty to a represented client should always raise a question in the mind of
an attorney who subsequently seeks to concurrently serve as a testifying
expert for a third-party who is adverse to the client. A testifying expert is (at
least theoretically) objective—hired only to evaluate evidence and/or infor-
mation, rather than to strategize and/or utilize this information to advocate in
favor of the third-party and against the client. [Citation.] Nonetheless, we
can envision situations in which the testifying expert’s firm, by virtue of its
representation of the client, may possess client confidences that could be
used to the client’s detriment. . . . [¶] [T]here is some force to the theory
. . . that ‘[i]t is no comfort to a client to learn that his attorney appears
against him—not as an attorney advocate, but as an attorney expert consult-
ant and witness.’ ” (Id. at pp. 947-948.) The court concluded, however, that
the undisputed facts in the case before it did not support a finding of conflict,
where the lawyers involved, Stromberg and Sugarman, were in two different
offices of the law firm, and the matters involved, the China deal and serving
as a testifying expert with regard to insurance coverage issues, were wholly
unrelated.

   To the extent that the court in the foregoing case concluded that use of the
word “representation” in the American Bar Association Model Rules of
Professional Conduct denotes that there must be an attorney-client relation-
ship with both clients involved in a potential conflict of interest, we decline
to reach the same conclusion with regard to Rule 3-310(C) of the State Bar
Rules of Professional Conduct, for the reasons discussed previously. Fur-
thermore, the factual situation involved in the Commonwealthcase is entirely
distinguishable from the one at issue here, in which a conflict of interest
                                                                           1037




clearly arose, and the lawyer’s duty of loyalty to the complaining client was
indeed called into question. In fact, the situation in the case before us is the
one hypothetically described by the court in Commonwealth, in which “the
testifying expert’s firm, by virtue of its representation of the client, may
possess client confidences that could be used to the client’s detriment.”
(Commonwealth Ins. Co. v. Stone Container Corp., supra, 178 F.Supp2d at p.
947.)

   Given our conclusion that violation of Rule 3-310(C) does not require
there to be an attorney-client relationship with both clients, we obviously
also reject defendants’ contention that the trial court erroneously refused
defendants’ special instruction No. 2, which stated that the rule “does not
apply unless the defendant acts as a lawyer for both clients. If he acts as a
lawyer for one client and as a witness for another client, he does not violate
the rule.”

   Defendants further argue that their special instruction No. 3 should have
been given. It would have instructed the jury that Rule 3-310(C) “also does
not apply unless the lawyer represents two clients at the same time. If he
stops representing one before beginning to represent the other, he does not
violate the rule . . . .” Defendants assert the trial court refused explanatory
instructions and instead “read the Rules to the jury without meaningful
explanation.”

   The court was correct in refusing special instruction No. 3, which would
have unduly emphasized defendants’ theory of the case, i.e., that their
representation of American had concluded prior to Long’s undertaking
representation of ADO. There was factual support from which the jury could
conclude that Long’s representation had not ended until he informed Ameri-
can, by letter dated March 14, 1996, that he considered the representation to
be at an end.         A lawyer may not avoid the automatic disqualification
rule applicable to concurrent representation of conflicting interests by uni-
laterally converting a present client into a former client. (Truck Ins. Ex-
change v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co. (1992) 6 Cal.App.4th 1050, 1057 [8
Cal.Rptr.2d 228]; see also Flatt v. Superior Court (1994) 9 Cal.4th 275, 288
[36 Cal.Rptr.2d 537, 885 P.2d 950].)           It therefore follows, a lawyer
may not avoid breaching the duty of loyalty which the concurrent represen-
tation rule is designed to avoid by unilaterally converting a present client
into a former client. In fact, such conversion may itself be a breach of
loyalty.

  In sum, the court’s instructions regarding the applicable State Bar Rules of
Professional Conduct, containing the text of the rules themselves, explaining
how the rules help to define the duty owed by lawyers to clients, and
 1038



defining the concepts of a client “secret,” “adverse,” “adverse employment,”
and “informed written consent,” were adequate.

   2. Rule 3-310(E)

   Defendants also contend that, as a matter of law, they could not properly
be found to have breached a duty delineated in rule 3-310(E) of the State Bar
Rules of Professional Conduct (hereafter Rule 3-310(E)). It provides: “A
member shall not, without the informed written consent of the client or
former client, accept employment adverse to the client or former client
where, by reason of the representation of the client or former client, the
member has obtained confidential information material to the employment.”

         In City National Bank v. Adams (2002) 96 Cal.App.4th 315 [117
Cal.Rptr.2d 125], Division Seven of this court discussed application of Rule
3-310(E) in the context of a motion to disqualify an attorney for undertaking
successive representation of adverse interests. The court stated: “Our analy-
sis of the case law involving successive representation of clients leads us to
three conclusions that guide resolution of this case. First, if the nature of the
representation is such that confidences could have been exchanged between
the lawyer and the client, courts will conclusively presume they were
exchanged, and disqualification will be required. [Citations.] [¶] Second,
there is a limited exception to this conclusive presumption in the rare
instance where the lawyer can show that there was no opportunity for
confidential information to be divulged. [Citations.] [¶] Third, the limited
exception is not available when the lawyer’s former and current employment
are on opposite sides of the very same matter or the current matter involves
the work the lawyer performed for the former client. When the lawyer
switches sides in an ongoing dispute such as the one between the parties in
this case, the nature of the former representation will always be such that the
exchange of relevant confidences must be presumed. [Citations.]” (City
National Bank v. Adams, supra, at pp. 327-328.)

          Defendants argue their employment with ADO was not adverse to
American, and that Long possessed no confidential information of Ameri-
can’s that was material to the employment with ADO. To support this
contention, defendants argue that American was not a party to the lawsuit,
that ADO sought only monetary relief against MDC, and American itself had
previously been adverse to MDC with respect to the MD-11. Defendants
contend that because under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure all discov-
ery is limited to nonprivileged information (Fed. Rules Civ.Proc., rule
26(b)(1), 28 U.S.C.), American’s privileged information was beyond the
                                                                        1039




scope of Long’s engagement by ADO and beyond the scope of permissible
questioning by MDC at the rule 30(b)(6) deposition. According to defend-
ants, Long was only required to testify as to matters known or reasonably
available to ADO that were specified in the deposition notice. Long made it
a condition of his employment with ADO that he not be required to reveal
confidential information obtained from American, and ADO accepted this
condition. “If, as the discovery master later ruled, this made Long an
inadequate spokesperson, the consequences were borne by ADO, not
[American], Long had created terms of employment that insured he would
not be required to reveal confidential information obtained from [Ameri-
can].” Defendants argue that “There was never any danger that Long would
disclose any such information because he was in sole control of any disclo-
sure and had agreed he would not make any disclosure.”

   We categorically reject defendants’ analysis. It is anathema to the State
Bar Rules of Professional Conduct to suggest that an attorney can place
himself in a situation in which he undertakes adverse representation of a
third party, and the client cannot object because the attorney has promised
not to disclose the client’s confidential information even though the infor-
mation may be decidedly helpful to the new client. It is precisely this
compromised situation, when the burden of deciding which client to favor is
placed solely on the attorney’s shoulders and within the attorney’s sole
power to decide, that Rule 3-310 is designed to avoid. In other words,
Long’s promise to maintain the confidences of American is entirely depen-
dent on his self-assumed position as arbiter of his own fidelity and what is
and is not a privileged communication. That is not a permissible avoidance
of his fiduciary duty.

  It is inconsequential that American was not a party to the ADO lawsuit.
The proscription against adverse representation exists whenever counsel’s
employment is adverse to the client or former client, and can exist even
though a prior client is not a party to the litigation. (Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer,
Inc. v. Tracinda Corp. (1995) 36 Cal.App.4th 1832, 1843 [43 Cal.Rptr.2d
327].) Conflicts of interest may arise in a variety of circumstances where
an attorney assumes a role other than as an attorney at law adverse to
an existing client. (Cf. Manfredi & Levine v. Superior Court (1998) 66
Cal.App.4th 1128, 1132-1133 [78 Cal.Rptr.2d 494].)

   Although ADO’s primary objective was to obtain monetary relief from
MDC through litigation, ADO’s pursuit of that goal included American in its
discovery proceedings. It was Long’s function as attorney for American to
resist ADO’s discovery efforts. While previously American had been ad-
verse to MDC with regard to a contract to purchase MD-11 aircraft, it was in
  1040




American’s interests to maintain a cooperative relationship with MDC,
whose aircraft it continued to use. Clearly it is in American’s interests to not
contribute to public disparagement of MDC’s aircraft whenever possible.

   Everything Long learned about the MD-11 while representing American
was placed beyond American’s control and its confidential status depended
on Long’s promise to safeguard that information. Clients always have to
trust attorneys to maintain confidences imparted during the course of the
attorney-client relationship, but they are not compelled to accept the attor-
ney’s invitation to “trust me” when he undertakes to align himself with a
new client whose interests pose a conflict of interest. A client is simply not
required to forfeit the right to control the disclosure of its confidential
information to the unfettered determination of its attorney regardless of his
vow to protect the client’s confidences.

   The rules seek to avoid allowing an attorney to take a role that places him
in actual or potential conflict with a client. As eloquently stated by the court
in Goldstein v. Lees (1975) 46 Cal.App.3d 614 [120 Cal.Rptr. 253] regarding
former rule 5 of the State Bar Rules of Professional Conduct, the predeces-
 sor to Rule 3-310: “The question is whether or not the employment of
Kirshman was adverse to the interests of the former client. Clearly, it was.
[¶] Business and Professions Code section 6068, subdivision (e), states: ‘It is
the duty of an attorney: . . . [t]o maintain inviolate the confidence, and at
every peril to himself to preserve the secrets, of his client.’ In this instance,
Kirshman accepted employment which surely at best must have tempted him
to reveal or to improperly monopolize the confidences and secrets of his
former client. As the Supreme Court recognized in Anderson v. Eaton
[(1930) 211 Cal. 113 [293 P. 788]] (at p. 117), ‘Conscience and good morals
dictate that an attorney should not so conduct himself as to be open to the
temptation of violating his obligation of fidelity and confidence.’ Clearly,
the acceptance of employment which threatens the revelation or improper
monopolization of a former client’s confidences is adverse to the interests of
the former client. To be sure, rule 5 implies that an attorney may accept
employment on a matter in reference to which he has before obtained
confidential information, but nothing in rule 5 sanctions the acceptance of
such employment when the representation of the interests of the new client
inherently tempts the attorney to reveal or improperly monopolize the
confidences of the old. Such a reading of rule 5 would conflict with the
policies underlying section 6068, subdivision (e), of the Business and Pro-
fessions Code; it would needlessly permit attorneys to create the appearance
of impropriety. Nor would such an interpretation offer assistance to the new
client. Clients are entitled to vigorous and determined representation by
                                                                                           1041




counsel. It is difficult to believe that a counsel who scrupulously attempts to
avoid the revelation of former client confidences—i.e., who makes every
effort to steer clear of the danger zone—can offer the kind of undivided
loyalty that a client has every right to expect and that our legal system
demands. Rule 5 operates to preclude any impediment to the fulfillment of
an attorney’s professional obligation to his client by proscribing any conflict
of interest in his representation of past and present clients. ‘ “It is better to
remain on safe and secure professional ground, to the end that the ancient
and honored profession of the law and its representatives may not be brought
into disrepute. Courts have consistently held the members of the profession
to the strictest account in matters affecting the relation of attorney and
chent.” ’ (Tomblin v. Hill [(1929)] 206 Cal. 689, 694 [275 P. 941], quoting
Addison v. Cope [(1922)] 210 Mo.App. 569 [243 S.W. 212, 215].)” (Gold-
stein v. Lees, supra, 46 Cal.App.3d at pp. 619-620, italics in original, fn.
omitted.)

   Defendants’ argument that MDC could not discover what information
Long obtained from American because that information was privileged is
unavailing. MDC was entitled to know what ADO knew. MDC was entitled
to fully explore the source and extent of ADO’s knowledge about problems
with the MD-11,12 and indeed to find out whether American had breached
the terms of its confidential settlement agreement with MDC by way of
Long’s disclosing to ADO information obtained from American. At the very
least, if Long had shared with ADO information he obtained from American,
American would have been placed in the position of having to invoke and
defend the privileged status of its information. If it failed to do so, the
information would have lost its privileged status and would have been
discoverable.

  Defendants misleadingly quote from the case of King v. Pratt & Whitney
(S.D.Fla. 1995) 161 F.R.D. 475, 476, to argue that as a federal rule 30(b)(6)
spokesperson, Long was “only required to ‘answer questions that are both
   12 Defendants argue that Long’s representation of American involved MD-ll’s with Gen-
eral Electric (GE) engines while ADO’s MD-ll’s had Pratt & Whitney engines, and therefore
the subject matter of the representations     was not substantially related. That is hardly a
distinction of consequence in the context of ADO’s discovery proceedings. ADO was
interested in obtaining all the information from American that it could regarding American’s
knowledge of problems with its MD-11. Long represented American in curtailing that very
discovery. Meanwhile, MDC had full knowledge that ADO was seeking to discover Ameri-
can’s documents; it was MDC, after all, that originally informed American of that fact. Where
the prior representation is in the same matter as the current representation, and the matters are
factually and legally intertwined, there exists a substantial relationship between the former
and current representation. “Absent the former client’s informed written consent, an attorney
may never switch sides in an ongoing legal matter.” (City National Bank v. Adams, supra, 96
Cal.App.4th at p. 330.)
  1042



within the scope of the matters described in the notice and are “known or
reasonably available” to the corporation.’ ” When the quotation is placed in
its full context, we find the King case actually held to the contrary:

   “[T]he Rule is best read as follows:

  “1) Rule 30(b)(6) obligates the responding corporation to provide a wit-
ness who can answer questions regarding the subject matter listed in the
notice.

  “2) If the designated deponent cannot answer those questions, then the
corporation has failed to comply with its Rule 30(b)(6) obligations and may
be subject to sanctions, etc. The corporation has an affirmative duty to
produce a representative who can answer questions that are both within the
scope of the matters described in the notice and are ‘known or reasonably
available’ to the corporation. Rule 30(b)(6) delineates this affirmative duty.

  “3) If the examining party asks questions outside the scope of the matters
described in the notice, the general deposition rules govern (i.e. Fed.R.Civ.P.
26(b)(1)), so that relevant questions may be asked and no special protection is
conferred on a deponent by virtue of the fact that the deposition was noticed
under 30(b)(6).

  “4) However, if the deponent does not know the answer to questions
outside the scope of the matters described in the notice, then that is the
examining party’s problem.

   “This interpretation does not render the ‘describe with reasonable particu-
larity’ language ‘superfluous’; rather, it imposes an obligation on a corpora-
tion to provide someone who can indeed answer the particular questions
presaged by the notice. Rule 30(b)(6) does not limit what can be asked at
deposition.

   “Since there is no specific limitation of what can be asked at deposition, the
general deposition standards govern. The reason for adopting Rule 30(b)(6)
was not to provide greater notice or protections to corporate deponents, but
rather to have the right person present at deposition. The Rule is not one of
limitation but rather of specification within the broad parameters of the
discovery rules. This is made clear by both the Advisory Committee’s
statement that 30(b)(6) ‘should be viewed as an added facility for discovery
. . .’ and the Rule’s final sentence: ‘This subdivision (b)(6) does not
preclude taking a deposition by any other procedure authorized in these
rules.’ Fed.R.Civ.P. 30(b)(6) advisory committee’s note. This Court sees no
                                                                          1043




harm in allowing all relevant questions to be asked at a Rule 30(b)(6)
deposition or any incentive for an examining party to somehow abuse this
process.

  “In sum, this Court concludes that Rule 30(b)(6) cannot be used to limit
what is asked of a designated witness at a deposition. Rather, the Rule simply
defines a corporation’s obligations regarding whom they are obligated to
produce for such a deposition and what that witness is obligated to be able to
answer.” (King v. Pratt & Whitney,supra, 161 F.R.D. 475, 476, italics added;
but see Paparelli v. Prudential Ins. Co. of America (D.Mass. 1985) 108
F.R.D. 727 [party must confine deposition to matters stated “with reasonable
particularity” in notice of deposition, but counsel for other party could not
properly instruct witness not to answer questions on ground they went
beyond subject matter listed in notice of deposition].)

   Also contrary to defendants’ suggestion, it is indeed the fact that Long put
himself in the position to be asked general questions by MDC, thus creating
an ethical dilemma. “The actual use or misuse of confidential information is
not determinative; it is the possibility of the breach of confidence which
controls. [Citation.]” (David Welch Co. v. Erskine & Tulley (1988) 203
Cal.App.3d 884, 891 [250 Cal.Rptr. 339].) It was not necessary for Ameri-
can to establish that Long answered the questions, thus revealing confiden-
tial information, in order to prove that Long breached his fiduciary duty to
American. He placed the noose around American’s neck, without its consent,
promising all the while not to kick over the chair on which it stood, blithely
ignoring the sweat forming on the corporate brow. He may have been
confident in his ability to resist the temptation to favor ADO’s interests, but
the State Bar Rules of Professional Conduct exist to prevent clients like
American from being placed in such a precarious position. “Nor does it
matter that the intention and motives of the attorney are honest. The rule is
designed not alone to prevent the dishonest practitioner from fraudulent
conduct, but as well to preclude the honest practitioner from putting himself
in a position where he may be required to choose between conflicting duties,
or be led to an attempt to reconcile conflicting interests, rather than to
enforce to their full extent the rights of the interest which he should alone
represent.” (Anderson v. Eaton, supra, 211 Cal. 113, 116.) We do not doubt
that Long believed he could maintain his client’s confidence, but American
simply does not have to take his word for it.

  3. Actual Impairment of Long’s Fulfillment of His Duties

  In arguing there was no legal basis for imposing liability, defendants
argue that “[c]ourts have only found breach of fiduciary duty or negligence
  1044



based on a conflict of interest when there was an actual, rather than a merely
potential, conflict of interest that actually impaired the attorney’s fulfillment
of his duties to the client.”13 “Actual injury has always been required as a
prerequisite to civil liability.” American did prove just that with evidence
that despite its legitimate protests, Long persisted in representing ADO.
American was compelled to appear at the federal rule 30(b)(6) deposition to
ensure Long was disqualified from representing a conflicting interest that
imperiled American’s confidences. Long actively opposed those efforts.
Clearly he owed a duty of loyalty to American that he did not fulfill, causing
damage to American.

   In nearly every instance the “ ‘ “relation between attorney and client is a
fiduciary relation of the very highest character, and binds the attorney to
most conscientious fidelity—uberrima fides.” [Citations.] Among other
things, the fiduciary relationship requires that the attorney respect his or her
client’s confidences. [Citations.] It also means that the attorney has a duty of
loyalty to his or her clients. [Citations.]’ ” (Cal Pak Delivery, Inc. v. United
Parcel Service, Inc. (1997) 52 Cal.App.4th 1, 11 [60 Cal.Rptr.2d 207].) Here,
when American would not consent to Long’s engagement by ADO, he
ceremoniously declared that he and SMRH terminated the relationship with
American to undertake a responsibility with an entity that was pursuing his
client’s confidences; confidences he and his law firm had been engaged to
protect. It matters not that in the final analysis American’s confidences were
not disclosed. What matters more is that Long and SMRH exhibited an
absence of loyalty when they jettisoned American in order to assume a
preferred position with ADO.

   The trial court did not err by refusing defendants’ proposed instructions
that (1) an element of a claim for breach of fiduciary duty is “[t]hat
 defendants’ representation of plaintiff was rendered less effective because of
 defendants’ breach of fiduciary duty”; and (2) “Even if you find that
defendants violated any of their duties to plaintiff, you may not find that
they are required to pay damages for breach of fiduciary duty or professional
negligence unless you find that the quality of the work defendants performed
for plaintiff actually was lowered as a result of any conflict of interest.”
Those instructions are misleading, incorrect statements of the law applicable
in this case. American was required to establish as an element of its case that
it suffered damages as a result of defendants’ breach of fiduciary duty. It did
   13 Having concluded there was as a matter of law a sufficient basis for the jury to decide that
defendants breached the State Bar Rules of Professional Conduct, we need not address
defendants’ contention that there was no legal basis for liability because there was no
violation of any common law duty owed to American, in the absence of a violation of the
rules.
                                                                       1045



so when it established it spent $8,174 in attorney fees to prevent Long from
serving as ADO’s federal rule 30(b)(6) spokesperson.

B., C.-*



                                   II.   Issues on Appeal

A.   Motion for Summary Adjudication on Claim for Punitive Damages

         Defendants filed a motion for summary adjudication of American’s
claim for punitive damages, contending there was no evidence of malice,
fraud or oppression on the part of Long or SMRH. Defendants contended
that American could not prove that Long or SMRH intended to injure
American or that their conduct demonstrated despicable conduct in con-
scious disregard of American’s rights. Long declared that he reasonably
believed that his service as a federal rule 30(b)(6) deponent would not
involve a conflict of interest with American. Moreover, defendants contend
that Long divulged none of American’s confidential or privileged informa-
tion during the course of his engagement by ADO or otherwise.

   Specifically, in their separate statement of undisputed facts, defendants
established by competent evidence that beginning in 1990 Long was engaged
by American to advise it regarding potential causes of action it might have
against MDC regarding “one version” of the MD-11, based upon perfor-
mance of the MD-11 concerning the distances the aircraft could fly without
refueling. American did not dispute those facts. In connection with that
assignment, Long and other SMRH lawyers reviewed relevant American
MD-11 documentation and drafted a complaint alleging claims against
MDC. The complaint was never filed.

  Although Long declared that American “stopped consulting SMRH about
whether to sue MDC based on the MD-11” in 1992, it is undisputed that
American retained Long in early 1994 to review American MD-11-related
documents to be produced by MDC in the ADO litigation. Defendants
contend American told Long that Wawro was the MLB attorney in charge of
representing ADO, but American disputes this fact. Long reviewed docu-
ments and prepared indices of documents for American between February
1994 and July 1995. It is undisputed that from 1993 through 1995, defend-
ants spent 53 hours on work for American.
  * See footnote,   ante, page 1017.
 1046



  It is undisputed that on February 15, 1996, American again engaged Long
and SMRH to review and resist the production of American’s MD-11
documents. Defendants assert that between February 15 and February 21,
1996, Long acted as “intermediary” between American and ADO regarding
a document subpoena ADO proposed to serve on American.

   In opposition, American responded that Long had been retained in July
 1990, and his work on behalf of American in the ADO litigation continued
through March 18, 1996, when Long terminated the relationship. American
expected Long to protect American’s interests with regard to discovery in
the ADO lawsuit. It disputed defendants’ characterization of Long’s function
in February 1996 as merely being an “intermediary” rather than as Ameri-
can’s counsel engaged to advise it how to respond to MLB’s request to
accept service of a subpoena for the production of its privileged and confi-
dential documents.

   Before accepting the engagement as ADO’s federal rule 30(b)(6) depo-
nent, Long telephoned Koorenny to “inform her” of ADO’s request that he
 serve in that capacity. American asserted that he did not tell her until late
February or early March 1996 that he had previously received ADO’s
documents on February 20, 1996. Defendants responded that ADO provided
a waiver to ensure Long would not be disqualified from representing Ameri-
can in the future, and that ADO agreed not to subpoena American in the
ADO lawsuit. American argued that the waiver letter did not state that ADO
waived its right to seek documents from American, and Long told Koorenny
that ADO had only agreed not to serve the subpoena “for now.”

   Defendants asserted that Long was never employed by ADO as an attor-
ney, expert witness, or in any capacity other than a federal rule 30(b)(6)
deposition spokesperson. American disputed that characterization. Defend-
ants further contended that Long told ADO and its counsel that he could not
reveal any of American’s information; Long reviewed no documents ob-
tained from American in preparation for his rule 30(b)(6) testimony; at the
deposition, Long expressly refused to answer any questions relating to his
representation of American; and Long did not disclose any of American’s
confidential information at any time during his period of service as ADO’s
rule 30(b)(6) witness.

   In response, American asserted that Long revealed confidential informa-
tion regarding his representation of American to Wawro. American con-
tended that when Long became ADO’s representative, all of his knowledge
of American’s experiences with the MD-11 became available to ADO,
                                                                        1047



including a large number of American documents he retained through the
time of his deposition. At the deposition, MDC “attempted to determine the
extent of Long’s knowledge about the MD-11 whether it was derived from
his representation of American or from ADO.” American also argued that a
declaration filed by Wawro in the ADO action—in which he expressed with
assurance that “American had a different case than ADO[; w]e concluded
that there could be no conflict between ADO and [American] in that
[American’s] MD-lls carried GE engines”—shows that MLB knew what
American’s MD-11 case was all about.

   In opposition to the motion for summary adjudication, American raised as
disputed issues: (1) whether Long concealed his representation of ADO’s
lawyers from American when he agreed to protect American’s interests in
the ADO litigation; (2) whether Long acted as a secret adviser to ADO’s
lawyers as early as 1993 in the ADO litigation; (3) whether Long misled
American to believe he had negotiated a limited production of American
documents when he had actually allowed ADO’s lawyers to pick from their
“wish list” of American’s highly confidential documents (referring to the
document indices given by Long to Wawro); (4) whether Long intentionally
breached his duties of loyalty and confidentiality by accepting, without
American’s consent, employment with ADO; (5) whether Long concealed
from American that he had given confidential and privileged documents to
ADO; (6) whether Long concealed his work as ADO’s federal rule 30(b)(6)
witness from American while still representing American in the ADO liti-
gation; and (7) whether defendants intentionally violated their duty of
loyalty to American by terminating American as a client so they could
accept more lucrative employment with ADO and by refusing to return
American’s documents until Long had been disqualified as ADO’s represen-
tative.

  In reply, defendants argued that their alleged (1) concealment of assisting
MLB with old, unrelated pleadings and advice on expert witnesses, and
representing them in other litigation; (2) secret sharing with MLB of confi-
dential, detailed indices of American’s documents; (3) accepting employ-
ment as ADO’s federal rule 30(b)(6) spokesperson; (4) and terminating
American as a client in favor of more lucrative representation, did not
constitute malice, oppression, or fraud, and would not justify an award of
punitive damages.

  After hearing argument, the court granted the motion for summary adju-
dication. It ruled that there was no evidence showing that defendants acted
with malice, oppression, or fraud. “There is no evidence in this record—and
nothing which would come close to satisfying the standard or [sic] clear and
  1048




convincing evidence—of the kind of misbehavior which would furnish a
basis for an award of punitive damages against movants: conscious disregard
of the rights of another; an evil motive; ill will; a desire to do harm; a
mischievous spirit; indifference toward obligations owed others; conduct
which is vile, base, contemptible, miserable, wretched, or loathsome; repre-
hensible conduct; fraudulent conduct; or conduct in violation of public
policy.” The court continued: “The various wrongs which plaintiff claims
movants committed do not show—or support inferences—of the level of
blameworthiness or the mental state necessary to support an award of
punitive damages. The reality is, moreover, that the record indicates that
defendant Long did not disclose [American]’s secret or confidential infor-
mation during his deposition, or ¿low anybody to get him into a conversa-
tion about affairs concerning [American], If there was a violation of the duty
of loyalty and the duty of candor, the record shows that there is no triable
issue of material fact concerning the extent of violation—it was relatively
minor, not tainted with the opprobrious qualities necessary to serve as a
foundation for punitive damages, and not intended by any defendant to be
harmful to plaintiff [American]. [Fn. omitted.]”

   On appeal, American contends that the trial court erred in granting the
motion for summary adjudication, thus precluding it from presenting its
claim for punitive damages to a jury.          Since summary judgment in-
volves pure matters of law, we review a summary judgment or summary
adjudication ruling de novo to determine whether the moving and opposing
papers show a triable issue of material fact. (Edward Fineman Co. v.
Superior Court (1998) 66 Cal.App.4th 1110, 1116 [78 Cal.Rptr.2d 478].) But
that is our sole function; we do not decide the merits of the issues them-
selves. (Molko v. Holy Spirit Assn. (1988) 46 Cal.3d 1092, 1107 [252
Cal.Rptr. 122, 762 P.2d 46].) The affidavits of the moving party are strictly
construed, and those of the opponent liberally construed. Any doubts as to
the propriety of granting the motion are resolved in favor of the party
opposing the motion. (Ibid.)

          Under Civil Code section 3294, punitive damages may be recov-
ered “where it is proven by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant
has been guilty of oppression, fraud, or malice . . . .” (§ 3294, subd. (a).)
Malice is defined as either “conduct which is intended by the defendant to
cause injury to the plaintiff,” or “despicable conduct which is carried on by
the defendant with a willful and conscious disregard of the rights or safety of
others.” (§ 3294, subd. (c)(1).) Oppression is “despicable conduct that sub-
jects a person to cruel and unjust hardship in conscious disregard of that
person’s rights.” (§ 3294, subd. (c)(2).) Fraud is “an intentional misrepresen-
tation, deceit, or concealment of a material fact known to the defendant with
                                                                                      1049



the intention on the part of the defendant of thereby depriving a person of
property or legal rights or otherwise causing injury.” (§ 3294, subd. (c)(3).)

   Since the 1987 amendments to Civil Code section 3294, oppression, fraud,
or malice must be proven by “clear and convincing” evidence. These amend-
ments indicate that the Legislature intended the evidentiary standard to
provide a statutory limitation on the award of punitive damages. (Mock v.
Michigan Millers Mutual Ins. Co. (1992) 4 Cal.App.4th 306, 331 [5
Cal.Rptr.2d 594].)         In ruling on a summary judgment or summary
adjudication  motion, “the judge must view the evidence presented through
the prism of the substantive [clear and convincing] evidentiary burden. . . .
[¶] [This] holding that the clear-and-convincing standard of proof should be
taken into account in ruling on summary judgment motions does not deni-
grate the role of the jury. It by no means authorizes trial on affidavits.
Credibility determinations, the weighing of the evidence, and the drawing of
legitimate inferences from the facts are jury functions, not those of a judge,
whether he is ruling on a motion for summary judgment or for a directed
verdict.” (Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc. (1986) 477 U.S. 242, 254-255 [106
S.Ct. 2505, 2513, 91 L.Ed.2d 202]; see also Stewart v. Truck Ins. Exchange
(1993) 17 Cal.App.4th 468, 482 [21 Cal.Rptr.2d 338] [citing Anderson with
approval].)

   Accordingly, although the “clear and convincing” evidentiary standard is
a stringent one, it does not impose on a plaintiff the obligation to “prove” a
case for punitive damages at summary judgment.14 (Cf. Rowe v. Superior
Court (1993) 15 Cal.App.4th 1711, 1734-1735 [19 Cal.Rptr.2d 625].) How-
ever, where the plaintiff’s ultimate burden of proof will be by clear and
convincing evidence, the higher standard of proof must be taken into account
in ruling on a motion for summary judgment or summary adjudication, since
if a plaintiff is to prevail on a claim for punitive damages, it will be
necessary that the evidence presented meet the higher evidentiary standard.
(Basich v. Allstate Ins. Co. (2001) 87 Cal.App.4th 1112, 1118-1120 [105
Cal.Rptr.2d 153].) The trial court here properly viewed the evidence pre-
sented by American with the higher burden in mind, as do we.

         Cutting through the quibbling of the separate statements of undis-
puted facts filed by the parties, the following relevant and undisputed facts
are unequivocally established: from 1990 through February 1996, Long and
   14 American’s reliance on Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s of London v. Superior Court
(1997) 56 Cal.App.4th 952 [65 Cal.Rptr.2d 821], for the proposition that the burden of proof
on summary adjudication motions is not the same as it is at trial, is misplaced. That case
discussed the party on whom the burden of proof is placed at summary judgment as opposed
to at trial, not the quantum of proof involved in various types of claims.
 1050




SMRH were engaged as attorneys to represent American with respect to its
potential claims against MDC with respect to the MD-11 aircraft and to
advise and assist American in protecting its related confidential documents
against the discovery proceeding in the ADO/MDC lawsuit. Over Ameri-
can’s specific objection, the defendants accepted an assignment from ADO
to serve as its Rule 30(b)(6) witness, submitting himself to a deposition that
implicitly involved the MD-11 aircraft. It is undisputed that Long declared
that he would not reveal any information that he obtained during his
engagement by American and there is no evidence that he did.

   Defendants’ contention, that the MD-11 that is the subject of the ADO/
MDC litigation is different from the MD-11 within the scope of defendants’
engagement by American, is illusory. Similarly, defendants’ contention that
ADO is not adverse to American because American is not a named party in
the ADO/MDC lawsuit is unconvincing. After all, American was the target
of discovery proceedings initiated by ADO and directed at documentation
that American regards as privileged and confidential. Consequently, Ameri-
 can was directly involved in the litigation and its interests were clearly in
conflict with ADO’s. That of course is the predicate of Long’s commitment
to not reveal information he gleaned as American’s lawyer. By refusing to
answer at the federal rule 30(b)(6) deposition any questions relating to
American, Long demonstrated that he was attempting to protect American’s
interests. His error was the product of advancing his own professional and
pecuniary interests and presuming he could do so without compromising his
fiduciary duty to American. By viewing the permissible scope of the rule
30(b)(6) deposition from a narrow and self-serving perspective, defendants,
and Long in particular, concluded that no conflict existed. Defendants
undoubtedly conducted themselves in a manner that American fairly per-
ceived as a willful and conscious disregard of its interests. Likewise, defend-
ants decided to characterize their attorney-client relationship with American
as essentially having ended in mid-1995, rather than viewing it as continuing
on a sporadic but ongoing basis. This, too, was disingenuous and demon-
strated a conscious disregard of American’s rights.

   The question is whether defendants’ conduct may be characterized as
“despicable.”        “Despicable conduct” has been described as conduct
which is “ ‘. . .so vile, base, contemptible, miserable, wretched or loath-
some that it would be looked down upon and despised by ordinary decent
people.’ ” (Mock v. Michigan Millers Mutual Ins. Co., supra, 4 Cal.App.4th
306, 331, quoting BAJI No. 14.72.1 (1989 rev.).) “Such conduct has been
described as ‘[having] the character of outrage frequently associated with
crime.’ (Taylor v. Superior Court (1979) 24 Cal.3d 890, 894 [157 Cal.Rptr.
                                                                         1051



693, 598 P.2d 854].) As well stated in Flyer’s Body Shop Profit Sharing Plan
v. Ticor Title Ins. Co. (1986) 185 Cal.App.3d 1149, 1154 [230 Cal.Rptr.
276]: ‘[A] breach of a fiduciary duty alone without malice, fraud or oppres-
sion does not permit an award of punitive damages. [Citation.] . . . Punitive
damages are appropriate if the defendant’s acts are reprehensible, fraudulent
or in blatant violation of law or policy. The mere carelessness or ignorance
of the defendant does not justify the imposition of punitive damages. . . .
Punitive damages are proper only when the tortious conduct rises to levels of
extreme indifference to the plaintiff’s rights, a level which decent citizens
should not have to tolerate.’ ” (Tomaselli v. Transamerica Ins. Co. (1994) 25
Cal.App.4th 1269, 1287 [31 Cal.Rptr.2d 433].)

         The conduct engaged in by defendants in this case does not reach
the level of despicability found in cases in which punitive damages were
found to be proper. (See, e.g., Waits v. Frito-Lay, Inc. (9th Cir. 1992) 978
F.2d 1093 [defendants intentionally imitated singer in advertising campaign,
knowing singer opposed commercial endorsements by musicians]; Hughes v.
Blue Cross of Northern California (1989) 215 Cal.App.3d 832 [263 Cal.Rptr.
850] [insurer refused to cover hospitalization of mentally ill insured due to
incompetent and reprehensible company practice]; Ball v. Posey (1986) 176
Cal.App.3d 1209 [222 Cal.Rptr. 746] [attorney exercised undue influence
over elderly, frail client in order to convert her assets to his own use].)

   In Taylor v. Superior Court, supra, 24 Cal.3d 890, a personal injury action
against an intoxicated driver in which our Supreme Court approved an award
of punitive damages, the court made the following statement which we find
instructive: “[A] conscious disregard of the safety of others may constitute
malice within the meaning of section 3294 of the Civil Code. In order to
justify an award of punitive damages on this basis, the plaintiff must
establish that the defendant was aware of the probable dangerous conse-
quences of his conduct, and that he willfully and deliberately failed to avoid
those consequences.” (Id. at pp. 895-896.)

   What sets this case apart from those referenced above is that, having made
the self-serving decision to work for ADO in disregard of American’s
wishes, Long did not then conduct himself in a manner which ultimately
compromised American’s confidential information. Without dispute, he
staunchly refused to reveal any confidential or privileged information re-
garding American in response to questioning by MDC during the federal rule
  1052



 30(b)(6) deposition.15 Because he would not answer these questions, he was
 found to be an inadequate rule 30(b)(6) witness for ADO. In effect, he held
 American’s interests above those of ADO. He had obtained a conflict waiver
 from ADO to the effect that ADO would not object if American wanted to
 use him as its lawyer in the future. In addition, he had been told by ADO,
 even if he did not pass the information along to American, that ADO would
 not subpoena American in the litigation against MDC. There is no evidence
 that he was aware at the time he accepted the ADO employment that there
 was an outstanding sixth discovery request directed at MDC which could
 involve the production of American-related documents and that American
 would want him to protect its interests by opposing that production. In
 summary, Long did not willfully and deliberately fail to avoid the harmful
 consequences of his adverse representation, and in fact he was unaware of
 some of the probable consequences of his conduct in that he did not
 specifically know of the outstanding discovery request. What he did do was
 cause American to expend efforts to have him removed as ADO’s rule
 30(b)(6) witness to avoid his revealing its confidential and privileged infor-
mation. Based on all the evidence, however, there did not appear to be any
imminent danger of his doing so. Strictly construing the evidence presented
by defendants, and liberally construing the evidence presented by American,
we cannot conclude that triable issues of fact were presented from which a
jury could conclude by clear and convincing evidence that defendants’
conduct sunk to the level of being “despicable.”

   Lastly, American argues that a triable issue of fact was presented about
the existence of fraud, an alternate predicate for the imposition of punitive
damages. American claims defendants committed fraud by concealing key
facts, namely that Long and SMRH represented Wawro, Russo, and MLB in
unrelated litigation in 1994; that Long discussed the ADO case with Wawro
and gave him copies of discovery requests he had prepared in a case against
Continental, as well as names of potential expert witnesses; that Long gave
Wawro the indices he had prepared of the American-related documents at
issue in the discovery request involving MDC; that Long was asked to serve
as ADO’s federal rule 30(b)(6) deponent and received documents to review
   15 While American argued that Long had already revealed confidential and privileged
information, and continued to do so in defense of his appearance on behalf of ADO, at worst
that information consisted of the following: the reasons American objected to the ADO
employment, the kind of engines used in the MD-ll’s purchased by American (GE versus the
Pratt & Whitney engines in the ADO MD-11’s—information which was public because it had
been disseminated in the press), the details of Long’s and American’s conversations and
decisions during February 1996 regarding the possibility of ADO’s serving a subpoena on
American, the fact American asked MDC to withhold certain documents from ADO, details
of billing information, and the fact of American’s retention of other counsel to represent it in
the MD-11 negotiations with MDC.
                                                                         1053




as ADO’s representative at the same time he was advising American on how
to respond to a possible subpoena from ADO; and that Long failed to tell
American that ADO would not require American to produce its MD-11
documents if American did not want to do so. We are not persuaded.

   Fraud is defined in Civil Code section 3294 as “an intentional misrepre-
sentation, deceit, or concealment of a material fact known to the defendant
with the intention on the part of the defendant of thereby depriving a person
of property or legal rights or otherwise causing injury.” There is no evidence
that any of the alleged concealments by Long were of any consequence or
adversely affected American. Long told American that he knew ADO’s
attorneys and had a working relationship with them. His representing MLB
and its lawyers and providing them with sample discovery requests and
recommendations of expert witnesses that had nothing to do with American
do not lead to the conclusion that he was violating his fiduciary duty.

   Further, American does not present evidence that Long’s representation of
it in the ADO litigation resulted in anything other than a mutually agreeable
resolution of the discovery dispute. Thus, his alleged failure to reveal (1)
that he gave ADO’s lawyers the indices of American’s documents and (2)
that ADO had decided never to subpoena American’s documents, resulted in
no damage to American. American does not contend and has not proved that
specific confidential and privileged documents were provided to ADO at
Long’s behest. As it turned out, ADO never served a subpoena on American.

   Finally, Long’s discussions with ADO concerning serving as its federal
rule 30(b)(6) representative while he was still representing American un-
doubtedly led directly to his assuming an adverse representation. Such
conduct does not, however, constitute fraud within the meaning of Civil
Code section 3294. Even though Long acted to further defendants’ interests,
evidence is wholly lacking to indicate that it was done with the intention of
harming American. It is undisputed that Long did not begin reviewing the
ADO documents until after he notified American that he was going to serve
as ADO’s representative, and had announced his view that there was nothing
further for him to do in representing American in the ADO litigation.

  Though defendants’ conduct was improper, and a violation of the State
Bar Rules of Professional Conduct, Long’s assumption that a lawyer may
accept a position other than as a lawyer with a party adverse to a former or
present client is not so opprobrious as to compel the conclusion that he acted
with a pernicious motive. Taken as a whole, and even construing the facts
 1054



most favorably to plaintiffs, we conclude that this is not a case in which a
jury could determine by clear and convincing evidence that punitive dam-
ages are warranted. We will not disturb the trial court’s grant of summary
adjudication.

B.-D.*



E. Award of Costs, Including Expert Witness Fees, Against American
Based on Refusal of Code of Civil Procedure Section 998 Offer

        The court awarded to defendants $126,022.79 in costs, including
$58,787.50 in expert witness fees, based on the fact American rejected
defendants’ offer to settle pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure section 998
(hereafter section 998). Defendants had offered to settle the lawsuit for
$59,200, in return for American’s dismissing the lawsuit with prejudice; the
offer to settle did not provide for entry of judgment in favor of American.
American was awarded monetary damages of $8,174, plus preoffer costs of
$26,815.16, which together totaled $34,989.16.

   American contends that it did, in fact, obtain a judgment more favorable
than defendants’ section 998 offer, and thus the trial court erred in awarding
costs to defendants. According to American, its primary purpose for litigat-
ing was to obtain a determination that defendants’ conduct was improper and
constituted a breach of fiduciary and professional duty. Therefore the judg-
ment finding defendants liable for breach of fiduciary duty was in itself more
favorable than a settlement for $59,200 without the entry of judgment in
American’s favor. American asserts that the plain language of section 998
requires that entry of judgment be part of any settlement offer.

   At the time defendants made their settlement offer (Aug. 1997), section
998 provided: “(b) Not less than 10 days prior to commencement of trial,
any party may serve an offer in writing upon any other party to the action to
allow judgment to be taken in accordance with the terms and conditions
stated at that time.” It continued: “(c) If an offer made by a defendant is not
accepted and the plaintiff fails to obtain a more favorable judgment, the
plaintiff shall not recover his or her costs and shall pay the defendant’s costs
from the time of the offer. ... In addition, in any action or proceeding other
than an eminent domain action, the court, in its discretion, may require the
plaintiff to pay the defendant’s costs from the date of filing of the complaint
  * See footnote,   ante, page 1017.
                                                                                          1055



and a reasonable sum to cover costs of the services of expert witnesses, who
are not regular employees of any party, actually incurred and reasonably
necessary in either, or both, the preparation or trial of the case by the
defendant.”

  In Goodstein v. Bank of San Pedro (1994) 27 Cal.App.4th 899 [32
Cal.Rptr.2d 740], an action for slander of title and negligence, the trial court
granted a judgment of nonsuit in favor of the defendant bank. The bank filed
a memorandum of costs and motion to recover expert witness fees, based on
the plaintiff’s rejection of the bank’s written statutory offer to compromise.
On appeal, the plaintiff argued that the bank’s offer to compromise was
defective for purposes of section 998 because it failed to allow judgment to
be taken against the bank, and instead required that the plaintiff file a request
for dismissal with prejudice.

    The Court of Appeal held that “[t]he distinctions set up by appellant are
not tenable.” (Goodstein v. Bank of San Pedro, supra, 27 Cal.App.4th at p.
905.) The court pointed to Code of Civil Procedure section 577, which
defines “judgment” as “ ‘the final determination of the rights of the parties in
an action or proceeding.’ ” (Goodstein, at p. 905.) It concluded: “The word
 ‘judgment’ in Code of Civil Procedure section 998 indicates that the statute
contemplates that an offer to compromise which is accepted will result in the
final disposition of the underlying lawsuit; the statute does not indicate any
intent to limit the terms of the compromise settlement or the type of final
disposition. The acceptance of the instant compromise agreement calling for
a voluntary dismissal with prejudice would have finally disposed of the
complaint as effectively (see Code Civ. Proc., § 581d) as one calling for
entry of judgment in favor of plaintiff. [¶] In light of the foregoing, we
conclude that the instant offer to compromise meets the requirements of
subdivision (b) of Code of Civil Procedure section 998.” (Id. at p. 906.)
“[A]s between the parties thereto and for purposes of enforcement of settle-
ment agreements, a compromise agreement contemplating payment by defend-
ant and dismissal of the action by plaintiff is the legal equivalent of a
judgment in plaintiff’s favor.”19 (Id. at p. 907.)

  We note that after the offer at issue here was made, the Legislature
amended section 998, subdivision (b) (Stats. 1997, ch. 892, § 1) as follows:
“Not less than 10 days prior to commencement of trial. . . , any party may
   19 One member of the appellate court dissented. His disagreement, however, centered
around the inclusion of a general release clause in the offer to settle, which would release not
only the parties in the lawsuit at issue but also would foreclose the plaintiff from pursuing
related actions against other parties. The parties in the matter before us do not contend that
defendants’ offer to settle contained a general release clause.
 1056



serve an offer in writing upon any other party to the action to allow
judgment to be taken or an award to be entered in accordance with the terms
and conditions stated at that time.” (Italics added.) While we do not hold that
the amended language applies to the settlement offer at issue here, the fact
that the Legislature expanded the language of the statute—we must presume
with knowledge of the holding in Goodstein—suggests to us that the Legis-
lature generally approved of the conclusion reached in Goodstein, that entry
of judgment in court is not strictly required.20 We conclude that defendants’
offer to settle was a valid one pursuant to section 998.

   A more difficult question is whether and how to evaluate the worth to
American of winning a jury verdict against defendants, in determining
whether American actually obtained a judgment more favorable than defend-
ants’ section 998 offer. American contends that the primary purpose of
pursuing this litigation was to obtain a declaration of defendants’ wrongdo-
ing, rather than to obtain a monetary judgment.

   American’s arguments are not unjustified. It does strike us as counterin-
tuitive and regrettable, at the very least, that here a plaintiff who prevailed
against defendant attorneys in an action for breach of fiduciary duty should
ultimately have to pay those same attorneys nearly $100,000. We cannot see
how section 998 could retain any vitality, however, if in each case in which
it comes into play the plaintiff can attempt to argue that any judgment
declaring wrongdoing by the defendant is worth more than the monetary
amount offered in settlement. Such an interpretation of section 998 would
simply be unworkable. We therefore decline to hold that the trial court
abused its discretion in finding defendants’ section 998 offer to be valid, and
in awarding defendants costs including expert witness fees.

   As to the amount of the expert witness fees awarded, American argues
that, due to a statutory amendment to section 998,21 defendants should not
have been entitled to an award of fees incurred during trial. Unfortunately
for American, section 998 was again amended during the pendency of this
appeal, such that a trial court may in its discretion “require the plaintiff to
pay a reasonable sum to cover costs of the services of expert witnesses . . .
   20 “While an intention to change the law is usually inferred from a material change in the
language of the statute [citations], a consideration of the surrounding circumstances may
indicate, on the other hand, that the amendment was merely the result of a legislative attempt
to clarify the true meaning of the statute. [Citations.]” (Martin v. California Mut. B. & L. Assn.
(1941) 18 Cal.2d 478, 484 [116 P.2d 71].)
   21 Effective January 1, 1998, section 998 provided that a plaintiff could be required to pay
the costs of services of expert witnesses “actually incurred and reasonably necessary in
preparation for trial or arbitration of the case by the defendant.” (Stats. 1997, ch. 892, § 1.)
                                                                           1057




actually incurred and reasonably necessary in either, or both, preparation for
trial or arbitration, or during trial or arbitration, of the case by the defend-
ant.” (Italics added; Stats. 1999, ch. 353, § 1.) As American correctly points
out, “[statutes increasing or decreasing litigation costs, even if silent on the
issue of retroactivity, have consistently been applied to cases pending when
they become effective. [Citations.] This rule applies even when the statutory
scheme is revised while the case is pending on appeal. [Citations.]” (Heri-
tage Engineering Construction, Inc. v. City of Industry (1998) 65 Cal.App.4th
1435, 1439 [77 Cal.Rptr.2d 459].)

   Finally, American contends that the trial court abused its discretion in
awarding defendants $19,307.33 for imaging documents and deposition
transcripts, and for display equipment rental. We disagree.

   Code of Civil Procedure section 1033.5, subdivision (a)(12) lists as
allowable costs: “Models and blowups of exhibits and photocopies of exhib-
its,” “if they were reasonably helpful to aid the trier of fact.” While
admittedly “high-tech,” the methods defendants used to display documents
to the jury were specifically approved by the trial court, which found them to
be highly effective, efficient, and commensurate with the nature of the case.
We can find no abuse of discretion under these circumstances. (Cf. Science
Applications Internat. Corp. v. Superior Court (1995) 39 Cal.App.4th 1095
[46 Cal.Rptr.2d 332].)
                                 Disposition


   The judgment and the postjudgment order awarding attorney fees are
affirmed. Each party is to bear its own costs on appeal.

  Hastings, J., and Curry, J., concurred.
